Title: Racializing infertility: How South/Asian-ness has been constituted as an independent risk factor in infertility research and IVF practice ☆


Abstract: Abstract

Since the 1990s, scientific studies have explored possible correlations of “race/ethnicity” with ovarian aging and, by extension, the outcome of In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) procedures. Relying on a close reading of English-language scientific publications about “Asian” or “South Asian” women, corroborated by interviews with selected authors in 2018 and 2021 as well as ethnographic research in India conducted between 2010 and 2017, I analyze processes and practices of racializing infertility over time and across space. In a first step, I explore the socio-political configurations through which South/Asian race/ethnicity became a relevant variable in infertility research between the 1990s and 2010s. Further, I interrogate how South/Asian race/ethnicity has been scientifically mobilized and problematized by examining publications from the US, the UK, and India/Spain. I argue that South/Asian race/ethnicity has been constituted as an independent risk factor for ovarian aging and/or IVF outcome by invisibilizing possible alternative explanations for inequalities with regard to infertility and by establishing comparability and continuity between contexts. Inquiring why researchers actively try to make a seemingly universal notion of South/Asian race/ethnicity present in their work, I point to global scientific hierarchies and postcolonial power dynamics that characterize this body of literature. Finally, I explore the implications that the notion of South/Asian-ness as risk has in medical practice in India and illustrate how it contributes to bringing the (in)fertility of bodies racialized as “South Asian” into new realms of capital accumulation.

Section: 1. Racialized reproductive panics

“In Indian women, as soon as they hit thirty, their [ovarian] reserve starts going down very fast, much faster than Western women,” Dr. Lakshmi, a prominent IVF specialist, explained to me in her hospital in Delhi. During my research on reproductive medicine in India , I often overheard similar statements during consultations asserting that the ovaries of “Indian women” would age faster than ovaries of “Western women.” Most doctors were astonished to see that patients of “advanced age” from the United States or Europe required only low doses of hormonal pharmaceuticals during IVF cycles and became pregnant rather easily. Dr. Lakshmi therefore drew the conclusion that the intersection of “advanced age” with being an “Indian woman” constitutes a risk factor for the success of infertility interventions and therefore demands urgent clinical attention. Newspaper and journal articles convey a similar sense of reproductive panic. In 2015, for example, the Hindustan Times published an article with the headline: “54% of women between 30 and 35 yrs have poor egg reserves: Study.” Although the article relied on a non-scientific evaluation of patients’ data collected by a diagnostic company in Mumbai, it indicates that ovarian aging has been discussed with urgency in India.
Despite the prevalent rhetoric of hope surrounding reproductive technologies ( Franklin, 1997 ), success rates have remained relatively low around the world. Medical research therefore attempts to identify factors that compromise reproductive success. From the 1990s on, “racial/ethnic disparities” have become increasingly common areas of inquiry, with scientific articles that investigate variations of ovarian aging and/or IVF outcome having multiplied in different parts of the world. While all studies use “white (or Caucasian) women as the referent group” ( Humphreys, 2016 : 213), and most studies in the US are limited to a comparison of “black and white women” ( Armstrong, 2012 : 651), there is a sizeable number of articles focusing on “Asian” or “South Asian” women.
Social scientists, who have analyzed the conceptualization and operationalization of racial/ethnic categories employed by researchers in the life sciences, have detected and cautioned against biologized, naturalized understandings of race/ethnicity (e.g., Hunt and Megyesi, 2008 ; Tutton et al., 2008 ). Scholars of critical race studies, science and technology studies, and medical anthropology have also argued against essentialist understandings of race/ethnicity while simultaneously highlighting that social categorizations of race/ethnicity may have biological consequences, as health disparities often manifest along these lines due to structural discrimination, poverty, malnutrition, exposure to toxins, etc. (e.g., Gravlee, 2009 ). In this sense, “[r]ace is not a biological category that is politically charged. It is a political category that has been disguised as a biological one” ( Roberts, 2011 : 4). Moreover, it does not constitute a stable signifier across time and space, but is closely folded within specific histories and political struggles ( Omi and Winant, 1986 ). Relying on material semiotics, Amade M'charek (2013 : 420) further argues that race is “a relational object,” as “different relational configurations make different versions of race ” (ibid.: 424, emphasis in original). Building on this literature and recent scholarly work about the intersections of race and racism with reproduction ( Valdez and Deomampo, 2019 ), I analyze the socio-political, scientific, and medical relational configurations that produce South/Asian-ness as a risk factor for ovarian aging and/or IVF outcome. In other words, I examine processes and practices of racializing infertility, whereby racialization signifies “the extension of racial meaning to a previously racially unclassified relationship, social practice or group” ( Omi and Winant, 1986 : 111). Engaging with a body of medical literature mainly from the UK and US with notable exceptions from India/Spain (i.e. studies comparing both countries), I examine how South/Asian race/ethnicity has been mobilized and problematized over time and across space, thereby pointing to the situatedness of seemingly universal assertions about South/Asian-ness as risk.
In a first step, I interrogate how South/Asian race/ethnicity became a relevant variable for infertility research between the 1990s and 2010s. I situate this body of literature within historical and contemporary developments, such as the worldwide proliferation of reproductive technologies, postcolonial migration regimes, paradigms of inclusion in medical research, market considerations, and a conceptual shift in which concerns about overpopulation have been supplemented with anxieties about elite reproduction. Second, I analyze the content of scientific publications, which have explored racial/ethnic disparities with regard to “Asian” or “South Asian” women. Examining epistemological practices, I argue that South/Asian race/ethnicity has been turned into an independent risk factor for ovarian aging and/or IVF outcome in two ways: (1) most experimental designs invisibilize possible alternative explanations for inequalities, which allows researchers to couch their arguments in racial/ethnic terms; (2) although different practices of categorization produce different versions of South/Asian race/ethnicity, researchers establish comparability and continuity between contexts. In doing so, they make a biologized and seemingly universal version of race/ethnicity present in their work. Finally, I explore the ramifications that the notion of South/Asian-ness as risk has in clinical practice in India and worldwide. Inspired by Anne Pollock's (2012 : 2) call to “pay attention to how medicine not only arbitrates but also intervenes on difference,” I show how the notion of race/ethnicity as biological risk has come to matter in medical practice and is having wide-ranging consequences, such as the overutilization of reproductive technologies, the popularization of screening programs, and the promotion of oocyte cryopreservation . I finally suggest that, instead of relying on these rationalizations, inequalities should be explained and addressed by taking a broader perspective on infertility than through a biomedical and racial/ethnic lens.

Section: 2. Methods

This article is primarily based on a close reading of English-language scientific publications situated at the intersection of reproduction, age, and, race/ethnicity. All articles examine the effect of “Asian” or “South Asian” race/ethnicity on the ovarian reserve or the outcome of IVF . The first step was a literature search on PubMed and ISI Web of Science (all databases). Search terms included South Asia, South Asian , Asia, Asian, race, racial, ethnicity, ethnic, ovarian reserve, egg reserve, ovarian aging, and IVF, with a date range of “all years.” After screening titles, abstracts, and full texts as well as handsearching articles through bibliographies , forty-one publications were identified as relevant for this research (e.g., I excluded conference abstracts as well as articles which mentioned “Asian” but only referred to groups designated as “Chinese” for example). Thirty-six of these publications rely on original research and five are meta-analyses. Many of the former are retrospective studies in which reproductive health specialists who work either in university hospitals or private clinics, analyzed their IVF patients’ data. Two of the articles were published in the 1990s, six between 2000 and 2009, and thirty-three since 2010, pointing to a rising interest in this topic. Original research was mainly conducted in the US (21), UK (10), or India/Spain (3), with singular exceptions from Australia (1) and Singapore (1). The publications appeared in a variety of journals but more than one third (14) were published in Fertility and Sterility , a high-impact publication in the field of reproductive medicine. Most articles do not name any funding sources (or explicitly state that there were none), some received funding from state institutions, and very few acknowledge support from pharmaceutical companies or via patent royalties. Content analysis of these articles was corroborated by semi-structured interviews with four authors who I contacted in person or by phone in 2018 and 2021. I selected authors whose studies I discuss in detail here and who represent slightly different approaches towards the study of race/ethnicity.
I further rely on ethnographic and historical research in India that I conducted over twenty-four months between 2010 and 2017. The questions posed in this article mainly emerged through research stays in one private and one public hospital in Delhi for a total of eight months between 2010 and 2012. During my stay in both hospitals, I followed daily clinical routines, participated in consultations, and observed medical procedures. I also conducted semi-structured interviews and informal conversations with ninety infertility patients recruited in the two IVF centers, and around fifty medical professionals practicing in various hospitals in Delhi recruited through snowball sampling. Moreover, I participated in several conferences and continuous medical education events in India that dealt with questions of ovarian aging. Ethical approval was not required by the academic institutions to which I was affiliated. However, I received permission from the directors of the two IVF units to conduct ethnographic research in these institutions, and I obtained informed consent from all study participants.
This study has several limitations. First, it neither constitutes a systematic review nor does it provide a comprehensive evaluation of scientific claims. Rather, it examines medical research on race/ethnicity “in a relational and situational analytical mode” ( M'charek, Schramm, and Skinner, 2014 : 463). Its goals are to understand how processes and practices of racializing infertility have operated over time and across space. Second, the study does not claim to be exhaustive. Despite a careful literature search there might be articles missing, particular since the field is dynamic and constantly evolving. Finally, I specifically highlight research conducted in India as well as its implications for the country's IVF sector. This is due to my own situatedness as a social anthropologist who has conducted ethnographic research in IVF hospitals in Delhi. Although only three of the articles discussed are co-authored by clinicians from India and Spain, debates about race/ethnicity have gained prominence in what is estimated to be the world's largest IVF market today ( International Federation of Fertility Societies, 2019 ).

Section: 3. Intersections: gender, age, race/ethnicity

Before exploring studies that introduce race/ethnicity as a variable into medical research, I describe another prominent factor for ovarian aging and IVF outcome in medical discourse: the age of the female patient . Age matters, as women are provided with a limited egg reserve at birth that declines over time and eventually culminates in menopause. The higher the age of the female patient, the lower the egg quantity and quality, resulting in lower IVF success rates. If only few or low-quality egg cells can be obtained during IVF, the likelihood of a positive pregnancy test or live birth is reduced. In this sense, the age of a woman undergoing IVF may turn into a risk factor for IVF outcome. Clinicians often cited thirty-five as a reproductive “threshold,” as is illustrated by a remark that a doctor in the US made to Puja, a thirty-eight-year-old non-resident Indian who later underwent IVF in a hospital in India where I conducted fieldwork: “At thirty-eight we should take the girl out of the equation.” Through this statement, which implied the suggestion to use donor eggs, he named Puja herself as a risk factor for IVF success because of her “advanced age.”
Yet, ovaries may age faster than expected – a condition called premature ovarian aging. In order to judge the status of patients’ ovarian reserves, IVF hospitals conduct tests in various forms: besides biopsies and ultrasounds, there are several hormonal blood tests, to which AMH (Anti-Müllerian Hormone) tests constitute a relatively recent addition. Since serum AMH levels roughly reflect the remaining ovarian follicular pool, AMH tests are taken as one indicator of the state of the ovarian reserve, not only in clinical practice but also in medical research.
Over the past three decades, a variety of scientific studies have examined the intersections of gender, age, and race/ethnicity in the field of reproductive medicine. Most authors – including those of twenty-four original research articles in my sample – conclude that “there are significant disparities in ART [assisted reproductive technologies] outcomes according to ethnicity” (Fujimoto et al., 2010: 382). Being an “Asian” or “South Asian” woman is posited as a risk in most of the research articles, which manifests itself in various ways: not only through differences in ovarian aging but also in pregnancy rates and live birth rates after IVF. Hence, the majority of studies conclude that South/Asian race/ethnicity constitutes a risk factor for premature ovarian aging and/or IVF outcomes. Or, put in a slightly more dramatic way, that “Asian ethnicity itself [is] an independent predictor of decreased ART success” ( Almeida Ferreira Braga et al., 2015 : 279). However, it is important to note that research results on this are not unanimous, as ten of the original studies I examined did not find any difference. Furthermore, some authors, particularly those of meta-studies, raise important criticisms about this body of scholarship. Humphries et al. (2016 : 212), for instance, highlight that “most [examined] studies were limited by sample size, inadequate adjustment for confounding [factors], selection bias, and extensive missing data.” This article interrogates how this quite broad consensus has nevertheless taken hold, and in what ways South/Asian race/ethnicity has become problematized as a possible risk factor for IVF since the 1990s.

Section: 4. Making South/Asian race/ethnicity relevant

How did the idea develop that South/Asian-ness is connected to infertility? Through what socio-political configurations has South/Asian race/ethnicity become a relevant variable in medical research? While the majority of texts in my sample stem from the 2010s, the beginnings of this literature can be located in the 1990s. A UK-based study by Mahmud et al., published in Fertility and Sterility in 1995, was the first to “assess the performance of a subgroup of British women of Indian subcontinent descent in a controlled comparison with white women, under identical IVF management” (1995: 104). It detects differences between both groups, specifically in terms of response to ovarian stimulation and rates of miscarriage. The authors conclude that “women of Indian descent perform relatively poorly in IVF compared with white controls” (ibid.: 106). The only other study in my sample from the 1990s was published by Lashen et al. in the British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology four years later. Comparing “Asian women,” a majority of whom were “first generation immigrants to the UK, mainly from Pakistan and the Punjab” with “white Caucasian women,” the study did not find any racial/ethnic disparities (1999: 407). The authors state that “under the same IVF protocol Asian women's response to controlled ovarian stimulation and IVF outcome are comparable to their white Caucasian peers” (ibid.).
Despite their contrasting conclusions, both articles cite a report from India as an inspiration for their own inquiries into racial/ethnic disparities. In 1988, Dr. T.C. Anand Kumar and his team at the Institute of Research in Reproduction (today the National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health) and the King Edward Memorial Hospital in Mumbai, who produced India's first so-called “scientifically documented test-tube baby” ( Bärnreuther, 2021 ), expressed surprise about their low IVF success rates in a letter to the editor of the Journal of In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo Transfer : “in our study nearly one-third of the patients did not respond adequately to ovarian stimulation, which is not in accordance with other studies” ( Kumar et al., 1988 ). They also pointed to their low pregnancy rates compared to other institutions worldwide. Subsequently, they explained these differences by their scant experience and new laboratory set-up: “It may be noted that the rate of pregnancies observed in our protocols is not as impressive as those reported by some of the institutions where IVF-ET [IVF-Embryo Transfer] has been well established for several years. Nevertheless, our results are quite comparable to those reported by some of the IVF-ET institutions during the early days of establishing the technique” (1988: 377). Lack of experience, they stated, had affected their results.
This observation about a particular research context at a specific time was taken up by the two research groups in the UK and re-interpreted as a general issue of racial/ethnic disparities. Both groups attribute Kumar et al.'s low IVF success rates in India to disparities between “Indian” and “white” women. As Mahmud et al. (1995 : 103) write: “Anand Kumar et al. have suggested that Indian women have a poorer performance in IVF compared with white women.” Lashen et al. (1999 : 407) also report that “Anand-Kumar et al. drew the attention to a possible effect of ethnic origin on in vitro fertilization (IVF) outcome when they reported that Indian women have a poorer performance in IVF compared with white women.” Although Kumar et al. did not compare “Indian” to “white” women, and clearly attributed the observed differences to their scant experience with IVF, both research groups in the UK explained them as being racial/ethnic disparities.
This reinterpretation happened at a time when debates about “racial and ethnic ‘difference findings’” ( Epstein, 2007 : 204) had become prominent, in the US and elsewhere (see below). Mahmud et al. (1995 : 103), for example, mentioned as a rationale for their own research the point that “a large proportion of the published literature on assisted reproduction relates to white women, and treatment regimes are usually optimized to suit responses in this ethnic group.” The scientific literature that I analyze here responds to the fact that, once IVF had become commercially available in the 1980s, research was conducted mainly with White patients. As data were collected during “live” interventions in private hospitals, it was those patients who could afford to use IVF services who became part of studies. “Historically, fertility research has focused on consumers of high cost elective procedures, such as ART (…). Since this population has included only small numbers of minority participants, exploration of racial/ethnic disparities in fertility has been limited” ( Devine et al., 2013 : 40). “South Asians,” as a large racial/ethnic minority group in the UK, had remained invisible in IVF research thus far.
The reinterpretation by Lashen et al. and Mahmud et al. further has to be read in the context of postcolonial migration regimes. After the subcontinent's independence from British colonial rule, migration from South Asia to the UK peaked in the 1950s and early 1960s. As former colonial subjects were entitled to UK citizenship, postcolonial Britain became an important destination. In the wake of post-war labor shortage and a political climate in which immigration was actively encouraged, men in particular moved from South Asia to the UK ( Peach, 2006 : 135; Gardener, 2002 ). Although immigration legislation in 1962 and 1971 halted primary migration, there was an increasing number of family reunifications during the 1970s and 1980s ( Peach, 2006 : 136f., Gardener, 2002 : 107). The growing number of women from the subcontinent living in the UK thus presented “a research opportunity,” as Lashen et al. (1999: 407) put it. Both articles from the 1990s therefore set the stage for a comparative body of literature that aimed to include "South Asians" as an underrepresented group in infertility research.
Apart from the UK, most articles investigating racial/ethnic disparities were published in the US during the 2000s and 2010s. The surge of scholarly interest in racial/ethnic disparities in the field of reproductive medicine was certainly related to the “booming production of racial ‘difference findings’” ( Epstein, 2007 : 205) in other medical areas in the US, in line with what sociologist Steven Epstein (2007: 6) calls the “inclusion-and-difference paradigm.” The paradigm that has been popularized by minority and women health advocates since the 1980s promotes the diversification of study populations in medical research. Challenging the idea of the White male body as a norm, it aims to understand group-based differences with regard to disease vulnerability and responses to medical treatment. In 1993, the NIH Revitalization Act mandated the inclusion of minorities and women in federally funded clinical studies ( Roberts, 2011 : 105). Today, as Linda Hunt and Mary Megyesi (2008: 358) explain, race/ethnicity has become one of “the most commonly used variables in health research, and is of particular interest to researchers studying the genetic basis of variation in human health .” Although the Human Genome Project promised “the end of racial thinking, the 1990s and 2000s have seen extensive debate in the natural, medical, and the social sciences on race/ethnicity” ( Tutton et al., 2008 : 465), leading to a “molecular reinscription of race” ( Duster, 2015 ). Nadia Abu El-Haj (2007 : 283) further links the growing focus on group-based diversity in medical research in the US to the rise of personalized medicine, the prominence of identity politics, and neoliberal capitalism.
In the field of reproductive medicine in the US, migration regimes and the growth of a privatized IVF market have also played a significant role in furthering research on racial/ethnic disparities. Migration from South Asia had long been prohibited or severely restricted in the US to preserve the composition of the White settler population. Only when the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 abolished yearly quotas, did it start to grow continuously. But many migrants who managed to navigate a still restrictive regime were highly skilled and educated. It is no surprise that these specificities are reflected in IVF usage. Dieke et al. (2017: 607), for example, report that IVF users characterized as “Asian American and Pacific Islanders ,” were not only “the highest earning race/ethnic group” according to U.S. income data with the “highest educational attainment,” but also the group which had the highest number of ART procedures per million women of reproductive age in 2014 (see also Deomampo, 2019 ). In the largely privatized medical market in the US, “Asians” thus constitute not only a research opportunity but also an important customer base for IVF.
The burgeoning IVF market – not only in the US, but in many parts of the world – has contributed to new strands of comparative medical research. While most scientific studies from the US and UK investigate disparities by comparing people of color to a White reference population within a particular national context, the articles based on an Indo-European collaboration attempt transnational comparisons of Indian to Spanish women. This has been made possible by the remarkable growth of a privatized IVF market in India since the 1990s ( Bärnreuther, 2021 ). Furthermore, the country's economic reforms since the late 1980s, which has led to the continuous easing of rules regarding foreign direct investment, has facilitated partnerships between Indian and foreign IVF companies. One example of this is NOVA IVI Fertility, a chain of around twenty private IVF centers in India, which was founded by the Spanish IVI Group and NOVA Medical Centers in India. In the 2010s, a team of doctors from both countries conducted comparative studies within this transnational consortium ( Iglesias et al., 2014 ; Kotdawala et al., 2019 ; Patel et al., 2016 ). “Common protocols and common software,” as one involved researcher described it, allowed for these novel experimental designs.
The growth of a privatized IVF market in India went hand in hand with a re-evaluation of infertility, which had long remained in the shadows of the country's rigid population control efforts. Due to global paradigm shifts in the 1990s, infertility has since been conceptually included into reproductive health programs ( Rao, 2004 : 17). Today, fears of overpopulation and hyperfertility have been supplemented with anxieties about elite reproduction, particularly with regard to the Hindu upper middle class. In this sense, some South/Asian bodies have turned from being conceptualized as dangerous to being seen as endangered; and from being conceptualized as economically threatening for national development to being seen as economically valuable for the IVF industry. These changes have fueled not only the growth of India's IVF market, but also a scientific curiosity about how to improve IVF success rates among women racialized as “South Asian.”
In sum, the rise of this body of literature is closely connected to specific socio-political configurations. Although they have unfolded in varying ways in different contexts, these configurations were all conducive to the formation of a medical discourse that links South/Asian race/ethnicity and infertility. While this section has illustrated why South/Asian race/ethnicity has become a relevant variable over time, in the following, I analyze how it has been mobilized and problematized in scientific studies across space.

Section: 5. Turning South/Asian race/ethnicity into risk

In what ways exactly has South/Asian race/ethnicity not only become an object of scientific inquiry but also been conceptualized as a risk factor for infertility? Examining in detail the epistemological practices used in scientific studies from the US, the UK, and India/Spain – with a particular focus on experimental designs and categorizations – I argue that South/Asian race/ethnicity has been constituted as an independent risk factor for ovarian aging and/or IVF outcome by invisibilizing possible alternative explanations for inequalities and by fostering comparability and continuity between contexts. A question that animates this section is how the broad acceptance of a seemingly universal notion of South/Asian race/ethnicity as risk could be established.
As mentioned, the first two articles published on this topic in the UK retrospectively ascribed the beginning of this body of literature to a brief comment by Kumar et al. in the Journal of In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo Transfer . Although Kumar et al. did not intend any comparison, both articles criticize the Indian team's observations of low success rates in India as “not based on controlled comparisons” ( Mahmud, 1995 : 103, emphasis added). “Comparing rates between [IVF] centers with different dominant ethnic groups is misleading because centers vary in IVF techniques, pituitary down-regulation protocols, and ovarian stimulation regimes, as well as in the racial origin of the women” ( Mahmud et al., 1995 : 104). In contrast, both Mahmud et al. and Lashen et al. set out to compare different groups of women in one clinical setting. Similarly, McQueen et al. (2015 : 399) state that “a study conducted in a single IVF program would (…) have the advantage of being able to better control for confounders.” Keeping the clinical setting constant, several authors argue, allows them to factor out specificities of place, such as differences in treatment regimes, and to ascribe disparities in IVF outcome to race/ethnicity. Following this lead, most publications in my sample are studies that are situated in a single clinical context or – employing a similar logic – in neighboring clinics within one city (e.g., Bendikson et al., 2005 for Boston).
Since the second half of the 2000s, several research groups, particularly from the US, have embarked on another mode of comparison. Making use of national databases to which IVF clinics report, they have published secondary data analyses, which allow them to compare not only at the level of the clinic but at the level of the country. Authors explain that they use databases because “most [clinical] studies are based on small sample size and subjects described are of selected ethnicities and races and not representative of a general population sample” ( Maalouf, 2017 : 905). By relying on national data, researchers try to transcend the specificities of a particular clinical context.
Although most articles work with the idea of control, authors simultaneously acknowledge that comparisons can never be fully controlled. While some publications identify and adjust for specific confounders, such as maternal age, BMI , embryos transferred, or infertility diagnosis, additional aspects that may impact on reproductive trajectories are neglected, for example the social determinants of health. As Humphries et al. (2016: 220) point out in a meta-study, “[n]one of the [examined] studies controlled for socioeconomic status, insurance, or other social or cultural factors that could contribute to lower success rates in minority individuals.” As such data are rarely available, possible environmental, economic, political, or sociocultural confounders usually appear as suggestions for further research in long lists at the end of an article but are not addressed in detail. In this way, race/ethnicity emerges as the only apparent cause of disparities and thus, eventually, a risk factor.
There is one study from the UK which explicitly shifts attention away from race/ethnicity, towards environmental factors . Starting from the observation that “variation [of IVF outcome] is frequently described in the clinical literature as ‘racial’,” ( Begum et al., 2016 : 745), the team of physicians, biological anthropologists, and public health specialists suggests that environmental factors, including “differences in socioeconomic status, cultural variation in approaches to ART, differential prevalence of diseases (…), and variation in quality of care provided to different ethnic groups” (ibid.), may have an influence on ovarian aging. In their research project, they therefore compare “Bangladeshi” women living in Bangladesh with “Bangladeshi” women who migrated to London when they were adults and “Bangladeshi” women who migrated to London when they were children, with a control group of “British women” of “European descent” living in London. They argue that, rather than clinical studies, migration studies “provide an excellent natural experiment in environmental change while holding genetic aspects constant” (751). Their results suggest intra-group variations, as “Bangladeshi” women who migrated to the UK as children have a significantly higher ovarian reserve than women who spent their childhood in Bangladesh. Although the researchers state that their study cannot address the exact underlying mechanisms, they conclude that it “points to the importance of the developmental environment during childhood rather than ethnicity in influencing ovarian reserve” (ibid.). In contrast to other studies which try to keep specificities of place constant or to transcend them in order to attribute observed differences to race/ethnicity, Begum et al. try to keep race/ethnicity constant and attribute observed differences to the developmental environment during childhood (see also Murphy et al., 2013 ).
At first sight, environmental factors also seem to play a crucial role in the three articles authored from India/Spain. In contrast to most of the US and UK literature, the research teams do not compare groups within one geographical context but between contexts, i.e. “Indian” and “Spanish” women in IVF hospitals in India and Spain that share common medical protocols ( Iglesias et al., 2014 ; Patel et al., 2016 ; Kotdawala et al., 2019 ). The title of the article by Patel et al., for example, reads “Ethnicity is an independent predictor of IVF-ICSI outcome: a study of 5,549 cycles in Spain and India ” (2016, emphasis added). This is particularly noteworthy, since most studies from the US and UK remain geographically unmarked.
However, as the title also suggests, the authors eventually shift course from an argument about differences between geographically constituted populations to an argument about racial/ethnic disparities. This becomes apparent through the alternation between the terms “population” and “ethnicity.” Claims about “Indian” and “Spanish” women turn into claims about “Asian” and “white Caucasian” women. Two of the three articles from India/Spain thus conclude that race/ethnicity affects ovarian reserve and IVF outcome (the third article did not find any differences between groups). Although one research team qualifies that “[f]urther research is needed to understand whether these differences are genetically determined or whether other contributing factors, such as environment, nutrition, or even lifestyle factors, such as sun exposure-related vitamin D deficiency , play a role,” it also states that “[e]thnicity should be considered to be a risk factor for diminished ovarian reserve” ( Iglesias, 2014 : 248).
Similar to most studies in the US and UK, the authors do not delve into possible alternative explanations for disparities, even though “the two populations compared were in different environmental settings, which may have affected the results of the study” (Bhide et al., 2014: 1628). While one of the authors told me later in an interview that the team is still unsure “whether what we found was a consequence of ethnicity,” it was not able to trace other factors. Nevertheless, the researchers interpreted race/ethnicity as an independent risk factor for ovarian aging and IVF outcome. In this way, a racialized understanding of infertility has made its way back to India, the place in which the discourse around racial/ethnic disparities had involuntarily started.
This is even more surprising since race/ethnicity has not been a meaningful category of difference in medical discourses in India. And it also “does not constitute a primary social or political identity in the subcontinent the way that caste, religion, language, region, gender, and class do (although it may be loosely configured within some of these categories)” ( Koshy, 1998 : 295, emphasis added). After being used under colonial rule in the 19th century, “race” has since lost much of its political importance, and the census of India abolished racial categorizations in 1951. It is therefore worth asking why this slippage occurs. Why are “geographically defined groups (…) equated with broad socially designated racial/ethnic groups” ( Hunt and Megyesi, 2008 : 358)? Why is race/ethnicity specifically made present in these studies?
As one author told me, the teams were inspired by debates in the US. The reference to race/ethnicity may thus constitute a nod to US (and UK) paradigms that have gained global prominence over the past decades. The studies from India/Spain may be couched in racial/ethnic terms in order to be able to speak to a wider community of scholars and to connect to dominant international discussions. Daisy Deomampo (2016 : 101) shows a similar phenomenon with regard to practices of transnational surrogacy and egg donation. “Indian doctors who rely on categories of caste and religion in their own social contexts, utilize Western categories of race in the global sphere of transnational reproduction.” Hence, the explicit presence of race/ethnicity in these studies may speak more to global scientific hierarchies and postcolonial power dynamics than to its usefulness in explaining disparities with regard to infertility.
After depicting how researchers compare by way of different experimental designs, I now analyze what they compare, by examining modes of categorization. Most studies which rely on data collected in one clinical setting do not share details about the classificatory systems they employ (some mention that they rely on self-reporting). Studies that use data from IVF registries in the US and UK define groups according to the system of the respective databases. Similar to other medical fields, IVF registries adopted classifications from state bureaucracies because they “had proven utility (that is, were workable and relatively uncontroversial) and were portable (that is, enabled judgements about generalizability and facilitated comparisons)” ( Smart et al., 2008 : 416).
In the US, the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART) has been collecting data about IVF cycles from hospitals since 2005, including information about race/ethnicity. The SART Clinic Outcome Reporting System (SART CORS) online database refers to the categories of the Office of Management and Budget that were coined in 1977 (but later revised) to report racial/ethnic groups ( Epstein, 2007 : 148). Remaining “relatively intact from their inception by taxonomists at the time of the major European colonial expansion , over 200 years ago, roughly corresponding to Linnaeus' 1758 schema” ( Hunt and Megyesi, 2008 : 350), these categories are often critiqued as being too broad. Researchers in my sample voiced concerns that the category “Asian women” is used, “as if they were a homogeneous group, although studies contradict the appropriateness of this practice” ( Purcell et al., 2007 : 302; see also Maalouf, 2017 ). Yet, more intricate categories, other authors argued, would go hand in hand with small case numbers – too small to be turned into statistically useful data ( Armstrong and Plowden, 2012 : 655). It is further important to note that “‘Asian’ is not merely a geographical referent but a metaphor shaped by particular geopolitical relations. In the US, (…) Asia has been historically identified with East and Southeast Asia (…) and the image of the Asian American derives from that association” ( Koshy, 1998 : 307). Of course, these associations have been shifting and vary even within the US.
In the UK, in contrast, “Asian” is identified rather with “South Asian” in popular imaginaries, due to Britain's colonial history. And it constitutes a more fine-grained category in the typology of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA), which resembles that of the UK Office for National Statistics. The HFEA, which has been collecting data about fertility treatments from IVF hospitals since 1991, distinguishes five “pan-ethnic groups.” The category “Asian” contains various “cultural background options,” such as “Indian,” “Pakistani,” or “Bangladeshi.”
India and Spain do not maintain IVF registries in which race/ethnicity figures as a category. Interestingly, the authors of these three studies decided to employ terms, which are reminiscent of the SART CORS system, such as “Asian” and “white Caucasian.” Simultaneously, however, they argue that – compared to the US – their experimental design has the advantage of providing access to more homogeneous groups (e.g., only “South Asians”): “This study has a major strength of comparing large and more homogenous ethnic groups based on their country of origin, than prior publications over ethnicity” ( Patel et al., 2016 : 821). Yet, claiming homogeneity the authors omit to acknowledge that India and Spain are diverse countries with long histories of migration. For example, Spain is rarely included in genomic studies, as it is seen to constitute a geographic area with high levels of “intermixture” ( Roberts, 2011 : 65). And in India, many IVF hospitals stress categories of difference, for instance when they classify gamete donors as “North Indian,” “South Indian,” or “North Eastern” ( Deomampo, 2016 ). One researcher from India even explained that his team is planning to conduct further research to examine finer categories of difference within the country. However, by framing their studies as a comparison between “Asian” and “white Caucasian” women, the research team tries to fit into the dominant literature from the US and UK, which mainly compares people of color to a White reference population.
It is doubtful whether a generally affluent and highly-educated group designated as “Asian” in the US, or an often economically marginalized “South Asian” community in the UK, or mainly upper and middle class IVF users in India can be compared in any meaningful way through the lens of race/ethnicity. Although in conversations, several authors questioned whether data are easily translatable between contexts, this ambiguity rarely shines through in scientific publications. Once studies are published, different versions of South/Asian-ness are often treated as comparable. In a similar way, nuances get lost with regard to the term race/ethnicity itself: while in the US, “race/ethnicity” or “race” are common categories, all articles written by authors based in the UK use the term “ethnicity” (apart from one exception – Mahmud, 1995 ). Yet, despite the historical discomfort that the term “race” causes in Europe – as one European interlocutor put it: “Race doesn't sound good. Ethnicity is clean” – it still remains an “absent presence” ( M'charek, Schramm and Skinner, 2014 : 459). There is a conceptual slippage between “race,” “race/ethnicity,” and “ethnicity,” and the terms are sometimes used interchangeably ( Morning, 2011 : 3). The studies from India/Spain further alternate between “population” and “ethnicity.” By neglecting these specificities and ambiguities in their analyses, researchers neglect subtle differences and establish continuity across space. This is another way in which they are contributing to turning South/Asian race/ethnicity into an independent risk factor for ovarian aging and/or IVF outcome. In the next section, I take a closer look at how the notion of South/Asian-ness as risk operates in medical practice in India.

Section: 6. Mobilizing South/Asian race/ethnicity in medical practice

Scientific studies about ovarian aging usually have the aspiration to change clinical decision-making. Many authors in my sample suggest that their results might be valuable for creating awareness among medical professionals and helping to warn patients about low IVF outcomes. Patel et al. (2016: 821), for example, argue that “Indian women have an inherited and non-modifiable drawback of ethnicity” which “cannot be changed, thus Indian women should be counseled about it.” When infertility is racialized, race/ethnicity turns into a medical concern.
In this way, scientific studies aid in producing racialized reproductive panics that translate into a sense of urgency in IVF hospitals in India and possibly elsewhere. For example, when confronted with patients defined as “South Asian” and being of “advanced age,” many clinicians accelerate the progression of medical interventions. Infertility patients in their thirties are often advised to undergo IVF as soon as possible rather than trying various cycles of less invasive procedures first (which also involve fewer medical risks and side effects). Moreover, IVF users are encouraged to use egg donation more often. As one researcher and clinician remarked: “we have to be more aggressive in terms of treatment and egg donation.” Thus, interpreting race/ethnicity as a risk factor results in different modes of care (see Cerdeña et al., 2020 on the notion of race-based medicine compared to race-conscious medicine).
This sense of urgency resonates with and reinforces common discourses in North India that problematize “delaying” childbirth. Particularly women among the upper middle classes who have chosen to pursue a career are often blamed for thinking about family formation too late. Clinicians in Delhi regularly complained that patients are “not aware of the facts,” and did their best to “destroy this false sense of security” among them. Dr. Lakshmi, who also mentioned the high expectations to bear children in India, even suggested: “It should be mandatory to get tested at twenty to twenty-five for ovarian reserve, because Indians are prone to early menopause . Everybody needs their own child. Our ancestors were right when they were getting their children married off earlier.”
Dr. Lakshmi's assertion that “it should be mandatory to get tested” points to another consequence that the notion of race/ethnicity as a risk factor may bring forth: screening a larger population rather than only testing people undergoing infertility interventions. Unsurprisingly, one fertility center in the US has already designed an “infertility risk screening test.” Based on a patented algorithm, the test relies on several biomarkers, including AMH levels. The company's website describes the test as screening "(…) young women for future risk of developing Premature ovarian aging (POA). POA affects about 10% of all women and can lead to infertility that often requires extensive treatments to overcome. Because POA is a silent condition without obvious symptoms , women with POA often do not know they have this condition, and a diagnosis comes as a complete surprise."
Depicting premature ovarian aging as a silent danger turns all women of reproductive age into being potentially at risk and “patients-in-waiting” (Sunder Rajan, 2006: 144). While the test is not marketed to any specific racial or ethnic target group, as in the case of the so-called “ethnic drug” BiDil ( Kahn, 2013 : 7), the fertility center explicitly mentions “women of Asian-Indian descent” on their website: “Recent publications (…) suggest that the prevalence of POA in women of Asian-Indian descent may be even higher.” In this way, a general “ethos of proactive fertility management” ( van de Wiel, 2020 : 306) isbeing coupled with notions of racial/ethnic disparities.
While, to my knowledge, such elaborate infertility-screening tests have not been offered in India yet, Priya Satalkar (personal communication), who has conducted research on social egg freezing in India, states that some medical practitioners have started to advertise AMH tests for unmarried women above thirty. Should the resulting values be low, they recommend oocyte cryopreservation . There is further evidence that IVF clinics in India are involved in publicly redefining premature ovarian aging as a common problem that may be mitigated through egg freezing. For example, relying on the “biological clock” argument, a prominent fertility specialist in Mumbai praised oocyte cryopreservation as a “fertility insurance” in a Tedx Talk. One can imagine that clinicians might also make use of scientific articles to advertise social egg freezing. Although one of my interlocutors rejected the idea that doctors would intentionally use research for marketing purposes, there is no doubt that one – maybe unintended – consequence of this body of literature is to bring the (in)fertility of bodies racialized as “South Asian” into new realms of capital accumulation through the overutilization of reproductive technologies and the popularization of screening programs. Racialized reproductive panics might further contribute to the normalization of oocyte cryopreservation and promote it among those segments of the population who can afford to make provisions for possible premature ovarian failure .

Section: 7. Conclusion

In this article, I have traced processes and practices by which South/Asian race/ethnicity has been constituted as an independent risk factor for ovarian aging and IVF outcome. I have provided a genealogy of this discourse, analyzed the content of scientific studies, and explored its implications for medical practice. After interrogating how South/Asian race/ethnicity has become a relevant variable in infertility research, I demonstrated the ways in which it has been mobilized and problematized in different contexts through a close examination of epistemological practices. Although several authors reflected on ambiguities in conversations, most are nevertheless reinforcing an interpretation of inequalities in racial/ethnic terms in their publications, in which they treat “Asian” or “South Asian” as seemingly context-free and comparable categories and neglect further factors that may explain group-based disparities.
If, as I have argued, seemingly universal notions of South/Asian-ness as risk need to be understood in their specificity as historically and geographically situated claims, it is worthwhile asking what kind of claims have come to matter and why. Although the studies produced in India/Spain had the potential to provide a different narrative due to their unusual experimental design, they were nevertheless fitted into hegemonic perspectives from the US and UK. The explicit presence of race/ethnicity in these studies can be attributed to global scientific hierarchies and postcolonial power dynamics that have shaped this line of scientific research.
However, this body of literature also has to be read against the backdrop of IVF as a “market-oriented medicine” ( Pollock, 2012 : 2), and its efforts to bring the (in)fertility of bodies racialized as “South Asian” into new realms of capital accumulation. Problematizing ovarian aging among “Asian” or “South Asian” women might turn out to be quite profitable: it may help to draw people who can afford to use reproductive technologies to IVF hospitals, and to sell invasive interventions to an ever-younger and more diverse population. Moreover, screening tests or social egg freezing may be advertised as preventive measures and marketed to the upper and middle classes, banking on women's anxieties about reproductive aging that are, at least partly, fueled by these studies.
This is not to deny that some people experience premature ovarian aging as severe disruptions to their reproductive lives. Nor is it intended to dispute that people of color often face higher chances of infertility and simultaneously have less access to reproductive technologies. But how can these inequalities be addressed without medicalizing a large part of the population? How can the possible negative consequences of being racialized as “South Asian” be discussed without further reifying South/Asian race/ethnicity as a risk factor? Although they require nuanced ways of analysis, it might be useful to shift attention towards alternative variables of risk, such as environmental factors , economic inequalities, structural violence, or experiences of discrimination. This might provide a more apt approach to explain and address disparities. And it might help to take a broader political perspective on infertility than through a biomedical and racial/ethnic lens.

Section: Acknowledgments

This paper was originally conceived as part of the workshop, “Interrogating the Intersections of Race and Reproduction in Medicine, Science, and Technology” held at Fordham University, New York, in 2018. I would like to thank the organizers, Daisy Deomampo and Natali Valdez, as well as fellow presenters for exciting discussions and valuable feedback. Special thanks go to Risa Cromer for her critical comments on several versions of this paper. I would also like to acknowledge the support of Nicole Ahoya, Olivia Killias, Esther Leemann, Juliane Neuhaus, Mihir Sharma, Smriti Sharma, Lindsay Vogt, and Irina Wenk. Most importantly, I am extremely grateful to my interlocutors in India, Spain, the UK, and the US as well as Jessica Michel for her assistance during the literature search. The ethnographic part of this research was funded by the Cluster of Excellence “Asia and Europe in a Global Context” at the University of Heidelberg . While writing the article, I also benefited from a scientific exchanges grant by the Swiss National Science Foundation ( IZSEZ0_183350 ).
