Title: Developing an Innu framework for health research: The canoe trip as a metaphor for a collaborative approach centered on valuing Indigenous knowledges


Abstract: Abstract

Indigenous communities increasingly assert their right to self-determination by requiring that participatory research approaches be used, valuing and prioritizing Indigenous knowledges , for the purpose of improving Indigenous health. While frameworks that focus on Indigenous knowledges are being developed, these must be adapted or developed by Indigenous communities because their knowledge is specific to place and inherent to their lived experience . No community-based participatory research (CBPR) framework for health research has been developed with the Labrador Innu. In addition, while the literature emphasizes the importance of relationship in research with Indigenous communities, the process of establishing relationships is underspecified. Within this context, we describe our experience in developing a CBPR framework for health research in a study that is community-initiated and fitting within Innu self-determination. We highlight the importance of paying attention to the theoretical roots of CBPR, arguing that this helps researchers focus on the centrality of Indigenous knowledges (in this case, Innu knowledge). This requires that non-Indigenous researchers question assumptions of universality regarding their own knowledge and see all knowledges as equitable. Such posture of humility allows non-Indigenous researchers to enter relational spaces that join researchers and Indigenous communities. Within these spaces, a true collaborative approach is enabled and Indigenous knowledges are uncovered and become foundational in the inquiry process. We illustrate these ideas by describing a model for opening relational spaces that include Indigenous and non-Indigenous researchers. We then present a framework that uses the metaphor of canoeing together to capture our CBPR approach for use in Innu health research. We outline the behaviors of non-Indigenous researchers to build and solidify relationships with Indigenous community researchers over time. This article is useful for non-Indigenous researchers interested in relational approaches to research with Indigenous communities, and for Indigenous leaders and researchers who seek community solutions through research.

Section: 1. Introduction

In countries like Canada, New Zealand, Australia, and the United States, where many Indigenous peoples reside, Indigenous communities and allied scholars have contributed to the development of collaborative research approaches that increasingly assert Indigenous knowledges 1 and ways-of-knowing 2 as central in all phases of the conduct of research ( Dobbs et al., 2016 ; Finn et al., 2017 ; Kingsley et al., 2013 ; Kovach, 2009 ; Mikraszewicz and Richmond, 2019 ; Tobias et al., 2013 ), with the objective of supporting Indigenous self-determination and improving Indigenous health. This emphasis on self-determination stems from increasing awareness of the enormous disparities in Indigenous peoples’ life expectancies and health status in comparison with non-Indigenous populations ( Anderson et al., 2016 ; Gracey and King, 2009 ; Nelson and Wilson, 2017 ; C. Reading, 2015 ; C. L. Reading et al., 2009 ). As articulated by Māori scholar Tuhiwai Smith (2012) , research must be conducted with and for Indigenous peoples. This approach is deliberately centered on improving the health status of Indigenous peoples as identified by the Indigenous peoples themselves.
Wilson (2008) posited that it is possible for dominant-system researchers to understand the concepts of Indigenous ways-of-knowing and that they should do so “with the depth required for respectful research with Indigenous people” (p. 58). Steinhauer (2001) and Menzies (2001) believe that non-Indigenous researchers can situate themselves as individuals who are informed by Indigenous paradigms and methods, and conduct research with and for Indigenous peoples. A recognized approach to conducting research with and for Indigenous people is Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR). CBPR frameworks are being developed that focus on the strengths of Indigenous peoples' epistemology and ways-of-knowing ( Absolon, 2011 ; Bartlett et al., 2007 ; Doyle et al., 2017 ; Hart, 2010 ; Kingsley et al., 2013 ; Kovach, 2009 ; Smith, 1997 ). For example, Absolon (2011) uses a flower as a framework for Indigenous methodologies, where the roots represent the grounding for Indigenous methods, the center of the flower represents self and self in relation to the research, the leaves represent the research journey, the stem represents the methodological backbone , the petals represent the diversity of Indigenous ways of searching for knowledge, and the environment represents the academic context. While Absolon's CBPR framework may be useful in certain contexts, for the Labrador Innu (hereafter denoted as Innu) who live in subarctic weather, the image of a flower is not meaningful. Moreover, knowledge is specific to place and inherent to lived experiences within each culture and community context; thus, a general CBPR framework may not apply to specific cultures ( Hart, 2010 ; Kovach, 2009 ).
Numerous research studies center on the health of the Innu, however, there has been no CBPR framework explicitly developed with and for this population. Therefore, we set out to develop this framework. Further, as we progressed in our efforts to set up the framework for research on Innu health, and as we consulted the literature on this topic, we found out that although most researchers emphasize the importance of building relationships, the process of doing so is underspecified ( Belone et al., 2016 ; Bull, 2010 ; de Leeuw et al., 2012 ; Jagosh et al., 2015 ; Kilian et al., 2019 ; Salsberg et al., 2015 ; Trimble et al., 2014 ). Hence, we elaborate on this process in the article.
In this article, we share our approach and experience in developing an Innu CBPR framework for health research based on the metaphor of canoeing together, as proposed by Innu partners. This framework was developed in the early planning stages of a study on Innu wellbeing and healing, and is currently being applied in that study. The framework was born out of a directive from the Innu Grand Chief to develop a methodological framework for health research based on Innu perspectives, which led to a partnership between the Innu and non-Innu researchers. From an Innu perspective, this partnership advances self-determination in health research by stipulating a framework directed to non-Innu researchers seeking to partner with Innu communities. The Innu have been gradually revitalizing their culture through a renewed sense of commitment to ‘Innu ways’ ( Samson, 2009 ). This advancement of self-determination, including the devolution of government-run services to Innu-run services, has produced a shift in expectations to reflect Innu worldview and knowledge in everything concerning the Innu, including research. The proposed framework and the process we followed to develop it may be useful to non-Indigenous researchers in their collaborative work with Indigenous communities, and for Indigenous leaders and researchers who seek community solutions through research.
In this article, we address the following research questions: How can non-Indigenous researchers engage in knowledge production with and for the Innu specifically, and Indigenous communities more generally? What CBPR framework is most appropriate for health research with Innu populations? The article is organized as follows: first, we present a background of Innu self-determination, explaining to the reader how this study originated. Next, we highlight theory and principles of CBPR with Indigenous peoples, the importance of centering research on Indigenous knowledges and ways-of-knowing, and of building strong relationships with and integrating Indigenous partners in the research enterprise . Applying our experiences in an Innu/non-Innu research collaboration, we propose a set of behaviors to open up, build and strengthen relational spaces that join community members and non-community members, and researchers and non-researchers. Building on the ideas discussed in the earlier sections, we offer the Innu-proposed canoe metaphor as a framework for conducting CBPR with the Innu, and outline the steps and principles that the metaphor encapsulates, particularly for researchers who are not members of the community participating in the research.
“Our” refers to the Innu and non-Innu researchers. Similarly, the pronoun “ we ” used in this article refers to the researchers. Researchers working with Indigenous communities are called to locate themselves in relation to the community they work with ( Tuhiwai Smith, 2012 ). Two co-authors of this article are Innu, one co-author is Indigenous non-Innu, first author (LMW) is of mixed Indigenous non-Innu ancestry , and two co-authors are non-Indigenous. LMW lived in Labrador, worked for the Innu, and has a long-standing and on-going relationship with Innu Elders , community members and leaders. The concepts and corresponding quotes we provide in this article reflect some of the immense knowledge shared by Innu partners during audio-recorded partners’ meetings.
This section introduces the Innu and provides a background for understanding how this study supports Innu self-determination in health research. The Innu are Indigenous people of the subarctic areas of the Quebec-Labrador Peninsula, living in the First Nation (FN) communities of Sheshatshiu and Natuashish within the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. The Innu speak Innu-aimun, an Algonquian dialect. Each community is organized as a separate FN with elected Chiefs and Band Councils, coming together under the umbrella of Innu Nation with an elected Grand Chief. Even though the Innu's first colonial encounters were through missionaries from Quebec who visited during the summers starting in the late 1600s, it was not until the 1950s and 1960s that the Province enforced assimilation policies . As nomadic hunters for millennia, the Innu are one of the last colonized people in Canada, becoming eligible to receive federally-approved health and education benefits in 2002.
Like other Indigenous populations across Canada, the legacy of colonialism continues to have negative effects on Innu health and wellbeing. There is substantial evidence, for example, that the Innu people experience multiple health disparities in comparison with non-Indigenous populations, and this does not appear to be equalizing over time ( Forsey, 2014 ; Pollock et al., 2016 ). To address these significant health disparities , the Innu led community health needs assessments that identified both health and political priorities (i.e., integrating Innu culture into local institutions and governance, building capacity to self-govern) in each of their communities ( Fouillard et al., 1995 ; Fouillard & Sheshatshiu Innu First Nation, 2014 ), clearly linking Innu health to Innu self-determination. Like the Innu, the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples in Canada ( Erasmus et al., 1996 ) asserts that self-determination of Indigenous communities improves health and wellbeing. Consistent with this, a landmark study indicated that communities with more control over their affairs through increased self-governance have lower suicide rates ( Chandler and Lalonde, 1998 ) and thus better community wellbeing.
In 2012, Innu Nation negotiated with the federal government for the creation of the Innu Round Table (IRT), a consensus-based Innu-led governance body with the final aim of achieving self-determination. In 2014, a document titled the Innu Healing Strategy ( Innu Nation, 2014 , Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics Government of Canada, 2014 ) articulated plans and priorities for health and wellbeing, stating that Innu culture, knowledge and ways are key in healing for Innu as individuals and as a people. In keeping with the vision of healing and self-determination of the Healing Strategy, the Innu Grand Chief decided to partner with non-Innu researchers, in a study conceived by the Innu, in order to articulate Innu knowledge in ways acceptable to national government decision-makers.
This article aligns with Innu self-determination in health research aimed at improving Innu wellbeing by developing an Innu CBPR framework for health research based on Innu knowledge and ways-of-knowing. The framework is currently in use in a larger study that is ongoing on mental health and wellbeing in the two Innu communities.

Section: 2. CBPR as an Indigenous-informed research approach

CBPR is an approach that includes all partners equitably, favors a common understanding of each partner's strengths, and involves bi-directional learning and communication about power among partners ( Wallerstein and Duran, 2010 ). In the area of health research, it aims to benefit the communities involved ( Israel et al., 1998 ), the ultimate goal being to eliminate health disparities ( Kellogg Foundation, 1992 ) and uphold social justice principles ( Macaulay, 2017 ). Some see CBPR as a way of initiating or boosting community transformation ( Kyoon-Achan et al., 2018 ) since it integrates knowledge translation into the knowledge creation process ( Salsberg et al., 2015 ). This is particularly true when the end-users of the research are actively engaged throughout all key phases and have the capacity and authority to apply the results towards implementing change.
A key theoretical forerunner of CBPR is Paulo Freire's work, Pedagogy of the Opressed ( Freire, 1972 ) . He proposed a form of pedagogical praxis for developing literary skills among the poor in Brazil. Crotty (1998, pp. 153–154) defines Freire's literary programs as inherently dialogical wherein the educators partner with the students and both groups engage in critical thinking. This process jointly enhances educators and students, and is achievable only through a continuous focus on self-scrutiny and mutual trust. For Freire, solutions are derived with the people, not for the people. The critical thinking of CBPR involves questioning the nature of knowledge and the underlying structures embedded in social relationships that have been shaped by history, culture and the local context ( Baum et al., 2006 ). These central aspects of Freire's work (e.g., interactive dialogue, critical thinking, joint growth, ongoing focus on self-scrutiny, mutual trust, questioning the nature of knowledge) are foundational to CBPR. Importantly, these foundations can be overlooked if researchers perceive CBPR as only a check-list of tasks ( Caldwell et al., 2015 ).
A CBPR theoretical framework proposed by Belone et al. (2016) focuses on how partnering processes can improve health outcomes. The notion of trust is central to this model; partnerships demonstrating power-sharing and co-governance are sustainable and generate effective solutions to complex public health problems. Belone et al.’s (2016) framework is very important for informing CBPR practice although it is not intended to provide guidance on how to develop partnerships at the outset or how to maintain them.
CBPR has become mainstream in research with Indigenous populations ( Whitesell et al., 2020 ) with participatory researchers (Indigenous and non-Indigenous) developing new approaches. CBPR with Indigenous communities has unique elements, including but not limited to recognition of negative experiences with research, respecting the intellectual property rights of communities and individuals, and establishment of community trust ( Allen et al., 2012 ). In Canada there is a history of research involving Indigenous peoples that was carried out without their consent ( Ermine et al., 2004 ; Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics Government of Canada, 2014 ). For example, the Government of Canada sanctioned nutritional experiments between 1948 and 1952 with Indigenous children living in some residential schools ( Mosby, 2013 ) without regard for the safety of the children. Unethical practices can persist when the perspectives of Indigenous communities on research priorities are ignored ( Castleden et al., 2010 ; Morton Ninomiya and Pollock, 2017 ), or when data or cultural knowledge are removed from communities that seldom benefit from the research findings ( Trimble et al., 2014 ).
In Canada for example, there are specific policies that state “best practices” for conducting research with FNs, Inuit and Metis People ( Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics Government of Canada, 2014 ). Best practices include community-based, collaborative, and participatory research that emphasizes social justice, alignment with Indigenous cultural practices and values, and equitable relationships among researchers and communities ( d eLeeuw et al., 2012 ; Tobias et al., 2013 ; Whitesell et al., 2020 ). The Assembly of First Nations of Canada adopted a series of principles to ensure ethical research with Indigenous communities ( Schnarch, 2004 ). They are called the OCAP™ principles of o wnership, c ontrol, a ccess and p ossession, conceived as a fundamental right linked to self-determination and the preservation and development of FNs’ cultures. Examples of ethical CBPR initiatives include a study in Canada with First Nations on developing community-driven wellness strategies ( Morton Ninomya et al., 2020 ), and a study in the USA with five Indigenous communities on developing health promotion interventions ( Walters et al., 2020 ). These studies were community-initiated and co-led, addressed community-identified priorities, and used local knowledge.
Battiste and Henderson (2000, p. 36) state that Western definitions of Indigenous knowledges do not work well because they cannot be readily categorized within existing Western science. They propose instead that the process of understanding Indigenous knowledges is more important than defining them. The philosophical stance and values of researchers affect the methodological approaches they utilize ( Crotty, 1998 ). Thus, for researchers engaging in CBPR, the process of understanding Indigenous knowledges includes becoming aware of their own philosophical stance and values, and how these can unwittingly favor their own familiar ways-of-doing in research. Researchers can make conscious decisions that privilege Indigenous knowledges and ways-of-doing, providing a foundation for de-colonization ( Wallerstein and Duran, 2010 ; Whitesell et al., 2020 ). For example, early in our research partnership, Innu researchers described visions and dreams when explaining their ideas; the non-Innu and Innu researchers made the joint decision of including this way-of-knowing as essential. This process of recognizing and respecting community ways-of-knowing requires humility on the part of non-Indigenous researchers as well as Indigenous researchers who are not members of the community ( Kilian et al., 2019 ).
We view Innu knowledge as the distinct ideas and skills held by the Innu. Innu knowledge, like all Indigenous knowledges, is not static but can be applied to modern times ( Durie, 2002 ; Kovach, 2009 ). To seek Innu knowledge, one needs to hear stories shared by Innu. For the Innu, story and knowledge are inseparable—the root word for knowledge and story is the same ( tipatshimuna ). The telling and the hearing of a story can only happen in a trusting relationship and we return later to this topic in the article. Innu knowledge is integrally associated with the long-term occupancy of ancestral lands. Innu survival is determined through the hunting territories that are accessed through family relationships . Family relationships are so important to the Innu's survival ( Mailhot, 1997 ; Samson, 2009 ) that Innu-aimun (the language of the Innu) has 26 different names for them, extending to seven generations and indicating an extended time perspective. Thus, Innu survival is intimately connected to ancestral territories and their knowledge is interwoven with the land–a view that has continued on from countless generations from the past. Kovach (2009 , pp. 37) expresses connection between Indigenous peoples' many knowledges and their ancestral lands by asserting that “our knowledges are bound to place”, and “can never be standardized, because they [Indigenous knowledges] are in relation to place and person” (p. 56); as such, the strong connection between knowledge, place, and people makes it impossible to develop a single Indigenous approach to CBPR that fits all communities. Given that Innu knowledge is bound to ancestral land, applying a CBPR framework developed for other Indigenous populations to the Innu people can become a way of re-inscribing colonization. Such practices can reproduce colonial relations even though they may be conducted by well-intentioned non-Indigenous researchers ( deLeeuw et al., 2012 ). Care must be taken to avoid foisting—on the Innu, in this instance—another Indigenous people's ways-of-knowing and doing because it would be an imposition, and foreign to their ways. As well, it would not help equalize the research power dynamics between the non-Innu and Innu researchers.
To avoid these problems, the literature emphasizes collaborative research with Indigenous communities built from relationships to establish a foundation of trust, mutual accountability, humility, and acknowledgement of one's limitations ( Bull, 2010 ; deLeeuw et al., 2012 ; Kilian et al., 2019 ; Trimble et al., 2014 ; Wilson, 2008 ), yet the manner in which relationships are established to engage Indigenous knowledges and ways-of-knowing is underspecified. Relationships constitute a foundational element of research methodology that actively integrates Indigenous partners, and are an effective and mutually-beneficial way of fully engaging Indigenous knowledges and ways-of-knowing. In the next section, we describe the process we used for developing strong relationships that enhance the value of health research with the Innu.

Section: 3. Building a relational space

This section describes experiences developing an ethical and relational space among Innu and non-Innu peer researchers as we built the research partnership. It also describes a basis for a more generic model that can be more broadly applied and that is shaped by salient concepts from the literature.
The relational engagement between Innu and non-Innu researchers predates the writing of this manuscript by several years. At the outset of the wellbeing project, LMW sought permission to enter the community and then several meetings were held between the Innu and non-Innu researchers, aimed at two-way dialogues regarding Innu needs and how to address them. Innu partners described the principles that Innu Nation require for any research conducted in Innu territory . Innu Nation principles for research are: full disclosure ; informed consent of individual participants; recognition and respect of Innu and discretion of Innu Nation to suspend or terminate research deemed unacceptable; community participation in all phases of the study including involvement of Innu co-researchers; the right of Innu participants to confidentiality, and any information participants consider confidential; community ownership of all primary data collected; and requirement to report back to the communities. Based on these, the application of the OCAP principles of o wnership meant the ethics application acknowledged the Innu FNs owned the information collectively and Innu individual participants owned their personal information. The principle of c ontrol meant Innu would be included in the development of the study and be coauthors of knowledge. The principle of a ccess meant collected data would be stored securely in a mutually agreed way, and in a manner accessible to Innu FNs. The principle of p ossession meant that stakeholders identified and/or approved by the Innu FNs would receive the results of the research.
After entering the community, many meetings were comprised of drinking tea together while the Innu spoke about how research processes and outcomes could result in meeting the needs of their community. The time taken for building relationships and trust cannot be rushed; many Indigenous groups, including the Innu communities, have experienced research in unethical and self-serving ways by outsiders who do not take the time and energy to get to know them and build strong relationships. In research, a colonial mindset ( Tuhiwai Smith, 2012 ) is countered by consciously and deliberately making space for Indigenous people's views and expressions about research and by mutually deriving methodologies.
Some Elders did not trust that Innu knowledge would be valued and equally weighted with Western-based knowledge in the research. Innu Elders told stories about their experiences in previous research studies, where research results had not been shared with them or they had been inadequately presented. One particularly poignant example involved a study in which the Innu could not own the data from the research. This earlier study recorded Elders’ stories who had since passed on, and the actual stories were lost as the researchers kept only the English transcription and deleted the voices of late Elders in their own language. This is an example of the history of disrespectful research that has negatively affected relationships between Innu community members and outside researchers. The non-Innu partners took care to understand and respectfully acknowledge harms done in previous research by listening closely and hearing the wrongs that were done to the Innu, and to pause to allow for the tears that could not be rushed. The non-Innu partners particularly reflected on the power of words and actions that indicate lack of respect, and the risks of perpetuating relationships of unequal power ( Fraser, 2018 ). Further discussion was carried out to reflect on the barriers and potential barriers to building a trusting relationship.
The acknowledgement that historical research did not respect Innu knowledge spurred a deeper dialogue among the Innu and non-Innu team members. Experiencing diminished trust from pre-existing relationships when the term “research” entered the conversation required us to revisit the deep theoretical foundations of CBPR (e.g., dialogical, critical thinking, joint growth, self-scrutiny and mutual trust, questioning the nature of knowledge). This produced an opening for integrating alternative ways-of-being, ways-of-knowing and of viewing reality. All Innu partners described how they derive knowledge from prayer, ceremonies, dreams and visions. These concepts of the nature of knowledge can present difficulties for academic researchers since dominant Western systems place value in objective rather than subjective knowledge. This is a fundamental epistemological difference between Indigenous and Western knowledge systems ( Chandler and Dunlop, 2015 ).
Concurring that any CBPR research where Innu ways-of-knowing inform an inquiry and that knowledge of the community must be viewed as both legitimate and expert ( Fletcher, 2002 ), the team then consciously moved to center the study on Innu knowledge and ways of understanding as unique, valued and legitimate. This also expressed our belief that while Innu knowledge and research methods have been silenced, marginalized and blinded through the processes of colonization ( Battiste and Henderson, 2000 ; Hart, 2010 ; Wilson, 2008 ), they remain extant within the Innu worldview. When the non-Innu researchers on this project demonstrated a commitment to accepting Innu ways-of-knowing as legitimate and valuable, the Innu partners came to trust that Innu knowledge was being utilized as fully as possible in all phases of the study. As stronger relationships based on mutual trust and mutual dependency were being established, the Innu partners gradually shared their knowledge and ways-of-knowing because we had all come to a space of safety and respect. In the remainder of this article, we call this space a “relational space”.
Based on our experience, we offer a model that represents the process for opening a relational space joining all researchers; this is presented in Fig. 1 . Key to the model are a set of behaviors for the non-Indigenous researchers conducting CBPR with the Indigenous researchers that open up a relational space joining all research partners (Innu and non-Innu in our case), building and solidifying the relationship between the researchers over time. These behaviors build on each other in a spiral mode and some are mutually-reinforcing (in a manner described by the Innu partners as kashten meaning ‘twirling winds with power’). However, except for the point of entry, they do not need to occur in the order as presented. These behaviors open a relational space, where Indigenous knowledges (Innu for us) are uncovered and become foundational to the inquiry. In our case, within the relational space we created, there emerged - proposed by the Innu partners - a framework that uses the metaphor of a canoe trip of all partners to capture our CBPR approach. Download: Download high-res image (459KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Model of a process to build a relational space between non-Indigenous researchers and Indigenous communities' researchers over time.
Representing the Innu CBPR framework for health research: the canoe trip as a relational space.
The Innu partners proposed to represent the CBPR approach with the metaphor of a canoe trip (see Fig. 2 ) based on the idea that to go on a long-haul canoe trip there has to be a relational space where there is mutual respect and cooperation to paddle harmoniously. The canoe trip takes place on a river through Innu lands - or Nutshimit (capitalized as a way of expressing respect for the land). Nutshimit refers to a spiritual “place” where the Innu live in harmonious relationship with each other and with everything in it (e.g., the Creator, animals, trees, rivers, rocks). The focus of canoeing is not just travel on water, but a journey through Nutshimit where the Innu and non-Innu partners travel together in one canoe, seeking knowledge (research process). For the Innu, seeking knowledge includes a spiritual component represented in Fig. 2 by the eagle - the bird that flies closest to Creator - watching the paddlers in their journey. The Innu belief that all provision for the research journey is at hand is depicted in Fig. 2 by the caribou, the Innu staple food . Download: Download high-res image (394KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Innu CBPR framework for health research.
Unbeknownst to the research partners at the time the metaphor of the canoe trip emerged to represent our research approach, the image of a canoe trip as a symbol of mutual respect and cooperation was used in the 17th century to document a treaty between the Haudenosaunee Confederacy and the Dutch settlers. A Treaty Belt indicated two separate lines representing two vessels journeying together, each following their own customs, laws, and ways of life, while understanding that over time they could help each other “as people are meant to do” ( Ransom and Ettenger, 2001 , p. 222). This image has been used since the 1990s by the Haudenosaunee communities of the USA and Canada to advance environmental cooperation with federal agencies. In the Innu metaphor, there are not two vessels but one; non-Innu researchers enter the Innu canoe to travel together, with the expectation that “overtime akenashau [outsiders] will not be needed” because Innu would be conducting their own research, as stated by an Innu partner. Thus, the metaphor of canoeing together is deeply embedded in Indigenous knowledges.
We elaborate on the concept of a canoe trip in Nutshimit as an Innu CBPR health framework, and assess it with the principles that Kovach (2015) defined as the fundamental aspects of Indigenous methodologies. In this, she distilled four principles: Indigenous knowledge systems as a legitimate way of knowing; receptivity and relationship between researchers and participants as a natural part of the research methodology; collectivity as a way of knowing, assuming reciprocity to the community; and Indigenous methods as a legitimate way of sharing knowledge.
We capture the discussion of assessing the framework against Kovach's Indigenous methodologies in Table 1 . Our approach includes a set of behaviors of non-Innu researchers (shown in the first column of Table 1 ), the Innu concepts that are understood (by the non-Innu partner) within a relational space (shown in the second column of Table 1 ), and the corresponding representation in an Innu CBPR framework (shown in the third column of Table 1 ). Table 1 . Innu CBPR framework where Innu knowledge is foundational to the inquiry. Behaviours of non-Innu researchers to open, build and sustain a relational space Innu concept understood in a relational space Innu CBPR framework representation Engage in a process of understanding Indigenous knowledges by becoming aware of own philosophical stance and values, of the differences in conception of the nature of knowledge and of the tendency of Western universality. Seek permission to enter, learn community protocols. Share past experiences of research. What went well/wrong? Learn how Innu knowledge is acquired and taught, past mistakes that devalued Innu knowledge. Consider all knowledges as equitable. Mutual journey with Elder(s) and academic oversight. Listen to understand community needs. Find common ground for research. Understand and explain context, consider how context influences research. Critically reflect on what non-Innu researcher brings, demonstrate value of Indigenous knowledges by critical thinking, facilitating joint growth, maintaining self-scrutiny and always growing mutual trust. Innu knowledge is intimately connected to the land. Survival is as a people/group who share a common culture and knowledge based on ancestral territory and an extended time perspective. Innu knowledge is passed experientially and orally. It is also subjective and can be attained through prayer, ceremony, dreams, and visions. Innu knowledge is learned from previous generations, enlarged by the current generation (seeking new knowledge) and passed on to the next one/s. Seeking new knowledge is a natural part of Innu culture; “is like going on a long-haul canoe trip.” Innu inquiry methods are relational, and include mutual learning and capacity-building. Innu knowledge is represented by the canoe, the bag that the Innu take on a journey and the method of loading the canoe. Academic knowledge is represented by the bag the academic researcher takes for the journey. To journey together, both bags have to be placed together between the paddlers; this represents the journey that takes both types of knowledges. The importance of relationships underpinning all research is represented by the water that sustains the canoe and by the “space” joining the two paddlers inside the canoe. The flow of water represents the time investment required. Mutual learning is represented by the action of paddling together. Both knowledge systems are essential and valid.
In the Innu metaphor of canoeing together through Nutshimit, Kovach's first principle of Indigenous knowledge systems as a legitimate way of knowing is represented by the Innu canoe itself as well as the items that are taken for the journey by the Innu researcher (e.g., the Innu bag), and the method by which these items are loaded on board. As shown in Fig. 1 , all these elements (i.e., the canoe, the Innu bag, and the loading method) represent Innu knowledge. Without a canoe and its accoutrements such as the Innu bag, and without the right method to load the Innu canoe (with the load placed between the paddlers and the weight heavier towards the back while keeping space on the sides for paddling while standing), it is impossible to make and survive the journey through the land using the water system. As such, without engaging Innu knowledge, it is impossible to conduct research informed by this knowledge. Non-Innu researchers, therefore, need to understand, value and trust Innu knowledge in order to feel safe and comfortable from the moment they step into the canoe and continue on as it moves to meet its destination.
Next, the water represents receptivity and relationship as foundational to CBPR, and also the time investment of CBPR with Indigenous communities. Without the water surrounding and supporting the canoe, it cannot move. Water is the context in which a canoe makes sense. In the same manner, in Indigenous contexts, it is not possible to conduct ethical research without strong relationships ( Bull, 2010 ); true engagement takes time and is often sustained by personal bonds among members of the research team ( Boffa et al., 2011 ). To develop relationships, non-Innu researchers must first seek approval for their proposed research, then receive permission to enter the community, and afterwards, work at becoming familiar with community cultural protocols. They must then, through hearing and active listening, work out what the community deems important. In the canoe trip, this is reflected by the behaviours of the paddlers responding to the stimuli inside the relational space. Non-Innu researchers need to become comfortable with the way the community communicates, with the silences that are kept, and understand the nuances of communication.
The harmonious canoe paddling represents collectivity and reciprocity—Kovach's third principle—as a way of knowing and assuming reciprocity to the community. It also signifies that Innu methods are a legitimate and significant way of sharing knowledge—Kovach's last principle. In the metaphorical canoe trip, the paddlers discuss essential principles (e.g., how to handle disagreements) and a governance structure before entering the canoe. The paddlers also need to commit to travelling together until they reach the destination. It is a partnership that involves reciprocity and interdependence; neither can leave the vessel and continue by themselves as each has a different role, and together they have the expertise needed for the different aspects of journeying. The paddler at the back directs and steers the canoe; this paddler is the leader and as such is an Innu paddler. To accomplish his/her role successfully, the back paddler must have expert knowledge of the land, the rivers, lakes, and the portage routes to cross from one body of water to the next.
The paddler in the front must know how to steer the canoe through rapids and shallow waters and know how to take instruction from the rear paddler. This is the non-Innu paddler. The team of two understands that rapids and other difficult spots are best negotiated through their pooled knowledge and skills for they have already finished (in the past) their lessons on paddling, and are prepared for the potential hardships of this particular journey. They know they need each other's expertise and know-how to get safely to where they are going and trust that this will be the outcome. The expertise of the non-Innu paddler is represented by the bag this paddler takes.
Collectively, both partners canoeing together uncovered a needed way-of-knowing wherein there is reciprocity within the team that will eventually extend to the community. This reciprocity of knowledge is captured by the fact each paddler takes their expertise (represented in each bag) and that this load is placed between the paddlers. The metaphor of the canoe trip, conceived as we considered our research processes, also represents the mutual learning that takes place during research. As knowledge is created as a result of research, the community members, as well as the research team, can become strengthened and more enriched in knowledge as it applies to a community's needs.
Having assessed the methodology we were using through Kovach's (2015) distillation of the central aspects of Indigenous methodologies, we conclude that the metaphor of canoeing together encapsulates an Innu CBPR framework. Fig. 2 offers a pictorial representation of the framework, while Table 1 integrates this discussion with the earlier discussion of establishing a relational space.

Section: 4. Conclusion

The purpose of this article was to outline how non-Innu researchers can engage in knowledge production with and for the Innu specifically, and Indigenous communities more generally, and to propose a CBPR framework that is appropriate for health research with Innu populations. The Innu are on a journey of self-determination with the final aim of taking control of all areas of community life, including Innu health. As part of this, the Innu Grand Chief directed that the inquiry considers Innu knowledge and ways-of-knowing as a vital part of this research. This led the research team to examine CBPR theoretical frameworks that focus on partners' group dynamics ( Belone et al., 2016 ), ones that would lead to successful collaboration. While relationships among collaborative partners in research with Indigenous communities are noted as most important to develop a foundation of trust, mutual accountability, humility, and acknowledgement of one's limitations ( Bull, 2010 ; de Leeuw et al., 2012 ; Kilian et al., 2019 ; Trimble et al., 2014 ; Wilson, 2008 ), the manner in which relationships are established to engage Indigenous knowledges and ways-of-knowing is not well elaborated in the literature. We proposed a generic model (represented in Fig. 1 ) that can be extended and adapted to the context of other partnerships i nvolving CBPR with Indigenous communities. Our experience shows that CBPR is well suited to employ Indigenous knowledge and ways-of-knowing in health research, because the theoretical roots of CBPR point to the importance of relationships; in turn, relationality creates an ethical space where Indigenous knowledges are uncovered.
Innu knowledge is bound to ancestral land and applying a framework developed for other Indigenous populations to the Innu people can become a way of re-inscribing colonization, reproducing colonial relations even though they may be conducted by well-intentioned non-Indigenous researchers ( de Leeuw et al., 2012 ). While CBPR has been used in health research with the Innu, no Innu CBPR framework for health research where Innu knowledge and ways-of-knowing are central to the inquiry has been published. Articulating an Innu CBPR framework for health research is an important milestone in Innu self-determination in health. Innu partners proposed a framework - captured in the metaphor of canoeing together ( Fig. 2 ) - to represent our CBPR approach for health research. We then assessed this framework with the four principles that Kovach (2015) defined as the fundamental aspects of Indigenous methodologies ( Table 1 ).
Congruent with an Innu worldview that has a longer time perspective, we realized that learning and commitment to a relationship is not necessarily bound by a project at hand, but that it can be a beginning that lasts for many lifetimes. We found that our relationships changed based on our continual growing and learning together. Wilson (2008, p. 135) states that “if research does not change you as a person, then you haven't done it right”. The strengths of this work include the mutual learning that all researchers, both Innu and non-Innu, experienced. To Innu researchers the process resulted in finding a stronger Innu voice in communications with non-Innu researchers. For LMW, the process was a realization and actualization of a space for the Innu in academia while still maintaining commitment and accountability to Elder mentors, and academic oversight.
Our approach can guide other health researchers who attempt to coalesce Indigenous and Western methods into CBPR partnerships with Indigenous communities. Our approach can also be useful for Indigenous leaders and researchers who seek community solutions through research. We also believe that the collective capacity of collaborative research aimed at achieving Indigenous self-determination has been augmented.

Section: Credit author statement

Leonor M. Ward, Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Mary Janet Hill, Conceptualization, Methodology. Samia Chreim, Methodology, Writing - review & editing, of multiple drafts, Supervision. Christine Poker, Conceptualization. Anita Olsen Harper, Writing - review & editing. Samantha Wells, Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Alex Andrew and Nympha Byrnes, community partners in this study, and the Innu Round Table (IRT) in supporting this study. Annie Piccard from the IRT, reviewed, provided feedback, and approved this manuscript prior to submission. The study is funded by an operating grant of the Canadian Institute of Health Research (FRN 145126) awarded to Dr. Samantha Wells, with ethics approval from the Innu Nation, University of Ottawa (#H-08-18-769), the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (#121/2018), and the Health Research Ethics Authority of the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador in Canada (#2018.229).
