Title: Cross-sectoral cooperation at the ministerial level in three Nordic countries - With a focus on health inequalities


Abstract: Abstract

To reduce health inequalities requires interventions that address the social determinants of health . The responsibilities, at the ministerial level, for these determinants are mainly situated outside the ministry of health. Accordingly, interventions to reduce health inequalities require coordination between the ministry of health and other ministries. Yet, a large literature in public administration has demonstrated that cross-sectoral cooperation is hard to achieve. The goal of this paper was to examine whether inter-ministerial cooperation relating to the reduction of health inequalities is occurring in practice. Semi-structured interviews were performed with senior officials at 26 ministries in Finland, Norway, and Sweden. The interviews were analyzed both qualitatively and quantitatively. The point of departure was a question if the ministries had initiated substantial measures, such as reforms, regulations, funding, or fiscal strategies, aiming to promote health equity in the population and, if so, if this was done in cooperation with other ministries. The informants reported 80 measures intended to promote health equity and stated inter-ministerial cooperation for 65 of these measures. Many informants described that cooperation between the ministries was routine and well-functioning. Thus, there was no recorded lack of inter-ministerial cooperation. However, the measures that were reported, seemed to be insufficient to reduce health inequalities, both due to lack of extent and lack of effectiveness. This might be due to insufficient political commitment to tackle health inequalities. If so, the WHO Health in All Policies approach might not be effective.

Section: 1. Introduction

Reducing health inequalities is an international goal that is part of the WHOs agenda ( Commission on Social Determinants of Health, 2008 ; Ståhl et al., 2006 ). To reduce health inequalities requires interventions that address the social determinants of health, e.g. the level of education, the level of unemployment, the financial situation of different groups and taxes on alcohol and tobacco. The responsibilities, at the ministerial level, for the social determinants of health are mainly situated outside the ministry of health, e.g. in the ministry of education, ministry of labor, and ministry of finance . Accordingly, interventions to reduce health inequalities require coordination between the ministry of health and other ministries.
A large literature in public administration has demonstrated that cross-sectoral coordination is hard to achieve ( Peters, 2015 ). Peters states that “ coordination remains a central problem for political and administrative leaders ”, depending on e.g. lack of information, time and trust, financial or political costs, the autonomy of ministries, and different professional and organisational ideologies. Most of the rewards that are available within the public sector, for politicians and especially for civil servants , arise from working within a particular policy silo, rather than finding ways to create linkages with others. Thus, the main incentives for individual actors (individuals and organizations) are to maintain status quo, which means not to invest in cooperation. Specifically, although the WHO has advocated a Health in All Policies approach (HiAP) ( Ståhl et al., 2006 ) it is not clear if ministries outside the public health area can see the value of cooperation. These ministries might also lack knowledge of the health effects of factors like e.g. the level of education, the design of the transportation system and the modelling of urban planning.
Therefore, the goal of this paper was to examine whether inter-ministerial cooperation relating to the reduction of health inequalities, is occurring in practice. This question was studied in three of the Nordic countries since their welfare policies are more extensive than in most other countries and since all of these three countries have explicit political goals to reduce health inequalities. Finland has been extensively involved in the WHO Health in All Policies (HiAP) strategy ( Leppo et al., 2013 ), Norway has adopted a Public Health Act ( Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, 2012 ), and Sweden has approved eight objective areas that aim at supporting health equity ( Lundberg, 2017 ). In spite of these policies the relative health inequalities have increased more in the Nordic countries than in other parts of Western Europe during the last decades ( Mackenbach et al., 2019 ). A potential explanation for this lack of progress in the Nordic countries might be insufficient cross-sectoral cooperation.

Section: 2. Methods

The analysis carried out was built on semi-structured interviews of senior officials at 26 different ministries in Finland, Norway and Sweden. The interviews were conducted with one to three informants (in total 30 informants). The interviews were transcribed and analyzed both qualitatively and quantitatively.
The Nordic Council of Ministers is the official body for inter-governmental cooperation in the Nordic Region. The Nordic Council has appointed a group of senior officials with special responsibilities for health. This group were told the objective of this study and were then asked to recommend, for an interview, one senior official at the ministry with responsibility for health affairs in each of the three countries. These three officials were asked to recommend senior officials at other relevant ministries in the three countries.
Before the interviews, information about the study was sent to each informant. The concepts of health equity, the importance of social determinants of health and the value of inter-sectoral cooperation were briefly explained. Thus, the information included text like “ We look at equal health initiatives from a broad perspective, such as reforms that counteract housing segregation, distribution of policies that benefit weaker groups or legislation that promote healthy living habits ”. In order to clarify the value of inter-sectoral cooperation a figure showing the 17 goals that are relevant for population health in the Sustainable Development Goals (Agenda 2030) were included ( United Nations, 2015 ).
Most of the approached senior officials accepted to participate, in Finland 9/10, in Norway 11/12, and in Sweden 6/8. Four ministries did not respond to the invitation or declined to participate, including the Ministry of the Environment in Finland, the Ministry of Finance in Norway, and the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education and Research in Sweden.
An interview guide was developed based on seven different theoretical frameworks, see Table 1 . The interview guide encompassed questions on context, structures, actors and barriers to cooperation, see Appendix 1 . The interviews started with four questions about cooperation with other ministries when an intervention to promote health equity was about to be initiated or implemented. The intervention ought to be substantial and encompass new funding, fiscal reforms, new regulations or new legislation. Table 1 . Theoretical frameworks, focus, and aspects in the interview guides. Theoretical frameworks Focus Aspects Reference Actor-oriented frameworks Rational choice theory Individual choices as a basis for action Key actors, driving forces John (1998) Ideas-based approach Political ideology as a basis for action Key actors, driving forces, political stability John (1998) Group and network approach Interaction between actors (ministries) as a basis for action Formal and informal interactions between actors, distribution of power John (1998) Structure-oriented frameworks Institutional approach Administrative context as a basis for action Ministerial administration, political majority and stability, political and administrative support and opposition John (1998) Socio-economic approach Socioeconomic factors as a basis for action Political stability, financial situation John (1998) A combination of actor and structure-oriented frameworks Actor-structure approach Combinations of actors, structures, and contexts as a basis for action Different combinations of the aspects above Lundquist (1987) Dynamic networks Policy streams approach Open policy windows as a basis for action Policy entrepreneurs, policy windows, triggering factors Kingdon (1995)
Interviews were conducted by the first author, a researcher and public official at a Nordic governmental agency, without previous relations with the ministries in Finland, Norway or Sweden. The interviews were conducted face-to-face during 25–90 min at a ministry facility in January to April 2018. All interviews except one were tape-recorded, after approval from the informant. For the interview that was not tape-recorded notes were taken by the interviewer. Transcriptions were made verbatim by a company specializing in transcriptions and sent back to the interviewer in an electronic format. The informants' names were not recorded, and the records (coded with a letter-number combination) and the transcriptions were handled in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (2016) .
A thematic content analysis was carried out in an iterative process ( Green and Thorogood, 2004 ). Both deductive and inductive coding were performed ( Elo and Kyngäs, 2008 ). Responses to interview questions that could be answered with yes, no, or very brief statements were registered in Excel documents. The eight method steps are presented in Appendix 2 . The results were presented both qualitatively and quantitatively.
In order to assess the coding reliability, an independent re-coding was performed. Three interviews (one from each country) were independently coded by the second author. The main aspects (measures, cooperation, policy documents and declarations) with exemplifying coding of parts of the transcriptions were given to the re-coder as a basis for re-coding. The inter-coding agreement between the two coders was initially 78% and after discussion 95%. No further re-coding was performed.

Section: 3. Results

The results from the interviews are presented in the following four sections: 1) The impact of international policy documents, 2) The extent of health equity-promoting measures, 3) The extent of cooperation between ministries, and 4) Qualitative aspects of cooperation between ministries.
Based on crude responses from the transcribed interviews informants at 19 ministries out of 26 stated that they were aware of Agenda 2030, 14 reported its impact on their work, five had only heard about it, and two did not know it at all. Informants at eight ministries out of 26 were aware of HiAP, five reported its impact on their work, five had only heard about it, and 13 did not recognize it at all.
Agenda 2030 and HiAP are intended to be highly relevant for public health and health equity. This was, however, not reflected in the interviews. Even though most informants were aware of Agenda 2030, the impact sometimes seemed to be modest. Yes, I think it [Agenda 2030] is a very good thing. I believe that it could contribute to breaking down the silos and making those working at the ministerial level to look more broadly at things. Because it's quite important. At the moment we are not very strongly connecting it [Agenda 2030]. We are aware of it, and our ministry has certain responsibilities in it, but it hasn't really been implemented very closely with our national policymaking. That's my impression. Yeah, we are not connecting them as tightly as we could. I wouldn't say affecting, but supporting. Agenda 2030 hasn't been an engine, but a supporting argument for the importance of this action. Thus, nothing new. But it gives extra weight for doing this.
HiAP was mainly recognized in Finland, where five out of nine informants were aware of HiAP, and four of these perceived its impact in their work. Because we have been working on that quite a lot in Finland. We have had two big perspectives in our Health in All Policies. One is how we get other sectors to work together with us when we are trying to solve our problems. The other would be how we can influence the other sectors when they are carrying out their own responsibilities. How we can influence their policies and their decision-making so that they will take health and well-being into account. Other all-embracing issues [than health] are much more well-known and much more active. So, if you compare public health politics with gender equity politics. HiAP is, in fact, similar to gender equity integration, but it's not at all possible to compare. Everybody knows that you have to integrate gender equity, how it is done and why, but very few know about HiAP.
According to the transcribed interviews, all informants except two, presented at least one measure that was intended to promote health equity. The informants from the social and health ministries mentioned 11 measures, see Table 2 , and informants from the other ministries mentioned 69 measures, see Table 3 . In 57 out of these 80 measures, the informants explicitly stated relevance for health equity or public health in general. For the remaining 23 measures, this was not stated. An example is given in Table 2 : A National transport plan, 2018–2029. The design of the national transport system has reasonably consequences for both health equity and for public health in general. The informant mentioned this measure, and accordingly, she or he might have had such expectations. Yet, this was not explicitly stated. Table 2 . Health equity-promoting measures and cooperation between health and social ministries and other ministries. Health equity-promoting measures a Focus on health equity and/or public health in general Cooperation with other ministries 1. Career opportunities for people with impaired work capacity. Part of a Government key project: Health and wellbeing, including focus on inequalities, 2016–2018 Health equity Public health in general X 2. Program to restructure child and family services. Part of a Government key project: Health and wellbeing, including focus on inequalities, 2016–2018 Health equity Public health in general X 3. National plan of action for better dietary habits, 2017–2021 Health equity Public health in general X 4. Legislation and taxation on alcohol Health equity Public health in general X 5. Legislation and taxation on gaming, revision 2019 Health equity Public health in general X National radon strategy, 2009–2014 Public health in general X National strategy for physical activity, 2005–2009. A new action plan will be released in 2019 Public health in general X One hour of physical activity in school. Government resolution 2017 Public health in general Unclear National transport plan, 2018–2029 X Customer-responsive services, aimed at increasing customer participation. Part of a Government key project: Health and wellbeing, including focus on inequalities, 2016–2018 X Revision of the construction legislation, 2018 X a Measures that are intended to directly promote health equity are numbered in order to facilitate referring to them in the text . Table 3 . Health equity-promoting measures and cooperation between ministries. Some measures were suggested from several ministries, these are only displayed once in the table. Health equity-promoting measures a Focus on health equity and/or public health in general Cooperation with the social and health ministry Cooperation with other ministries 1. National strategy for parental support, 2018–2021 Health equity Public health in general X X 2. Framing plan for preschools, including healthy eating and physical activity. Legislation from 2017 Health equity Public health in general X X 3. National action plan for improved eating habits, 2017–2021 Health equity Public health in general X X 4. Career opportunities for people with impaired work capacity. Government key project 2016–2018 Health equity Public health in general X X 5. National program for youth employment and youth politics, including mental health, 2017–2019 Health equity Public health in general X X 6. Reform on basic social security and activeness, 2017–2019 Health equity Public health in general X X 7. Health and well-being. Government key project Health equity Public health in general X X 8. A wellbeing and health promotion coefficient. Part of a health and social service reform (work in progress) Health equity Public health in general X 9. Program for public health, 2014–2015 Health equity Public health in general X 10. National reform of social welfare and health care services, from 2015. Full implementation from 2019 Health equity Public health in general X 11. Chemical substance work. Continuous work Health equity Public health in general X 12. Sustainable society construction. Research program, 2018–2028 Health equity Public health in general X 13. Disability politics. Government bill 2018 Health equity X X 14. Supplementary child health care visits in deprived areas, 2018–2020. Related to the reform program against segregation Health equity X X 15. A national program aimed at children and young people, 2015–2020, 64 measures, six ministries Health equity X X 16. National strategy against child poverty 2015–2017. Yearly allowance Health equity X X 17. Multi-sectoral joint service enhancing employability. Legislation Health equity X X 18. Individual placement and support (IPS). Related to the escalation plan for work and mental health Health equity X 19. National reform for growth and employment, Europe 2020 strategy. Including poverty reduction targets Health equity X 20. Social housing policy. Research program, 2018–2028 Health equity X 21. Reform program against segregation, 2017–2025 Health equity X 22. Crime prevention in urban planning. Ministerial cooperation, initiated 2018 Health equity X 23. Wage subsidy aimed at promoting employment of the unemployed Health equity Work environment strategies National strategy, 2016–2010 Public health in general X X Escalation plan against drugs, 2016–2020 Public health in general X X Escalation plan against violence and abuse, 2017–2021 Public health in general X X Housing for welfare National strategy, 2014–2020 Public health in general X X Escalation plan for work and mental health. Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, 2013–2016 Public health in general X X Good and effective health, care, and welfare services. Research program, 2015–2025 Public health in general X X National dietary advice Public health in general X X Sugar tax, 2018. A revised taxation to the level of 2017 is suggested Public health in general X X Marketing of unhealthy food and beverages aimed at children. A national self-regulating system Public health in general X X National strategy for sexual health, 2017–2022 Public health in general X X National action plan for outdoor activities Public health in general X X National exercise policy, work in progress Public health in general X X National food policy, 2016–2019 Public health in general X X Escalation plan for mental health among children and young people, from 2019 Public health in general X X National strategy for an elderly-adapted society, from 2016. Related to evaluation of public health politics Public health in general X X National quality reform for elderly people, 2019–2023 Public health in general X National nutrition program to increase seafood consumption among children, from 2007 Public health in general X Medical products in the environment. Continuous work Public health in general X Primary health care report Public health in general X Live your whole life. Elderly reform, 2017–2018 Public health in general X Swimming education. National strategy, 2016–2017 Public health in general X Free fruit in school. National mission, partly financed 2017 Public health in general X Sugar tax, 2011–2014. In 2014 the tax was planned to be expanded but instead it was removed Public health in general X National grant aiming to increase seafood consumption in the population, from 2015 Public health in general National walking and cycling program, 2018–2019. Aiming to increase levels of walking and cycling by 2030 Public health in general Labor market strategies for immigrants, young people, and long-term unemployed. Related to the reform program against segregation X X Local government reform. National welfare reform, from 2015 X X National strategy for better coordination in the administration for prison inmates, 2017–2021 X X National action plan against discrimination related to sexual orientation, gender identity, or expression, 2017–2020, 43 measures, eight ministries X X National action plan for universal construction and availability, 2015–2019, 47 measures, 11 ministries X X Escalation plan for rehabilitation and habilitation, 2017–2019 X X Government program for financing of local authorities X X Climate strategy National strategy, 2017–2045 X Dissemination of program against intimate partner violence X National center for food, health, and physical activity X Non-discrimination act, from 2015 X National strategy for internal safety X Dissemination of a program for juvenile criminals X National strategy against hateful behavior, 2016–2020 X National action plan against anti-semitism, 2016–2020 X Leisure declaration Yearly allowance X Regional contracts for functional transports. Related to the national transport plan X National transport plan, 2018–2029 Act on equality between women and men from 1987 Act on transport services, in three phases, from 2018 a Measures that are intended to directly promote health equity are numbered in order to facilitate referring to them in the text.
A large number of different policy fields were addressed, e.g. alcohol ( Table 2 , measure 4), education ( Table 3 measure 2), dietary habits ( Table 3 measure 3), employment ( Table 3 measure 5) and poverty ( Table 3 measure 19).
Based on the responses to Q2 in the interview guide “ Has any of these measures been initiated by or developed together with the ministry of social affairs and health/other ministries? ” most informants stated inter-ministerial cooperation, see Tables 2 and 3 . The informants representing health and social ministries stated cooperation for 10/11 measure and the informants from other ministries stated cooperation for 54/69 measures. For measures where relevance for health equity and/or health in general had been explicitly stated inter-ministerial cooperation was mentioned for 41/57 measures.
Three themes emerged from the inductive coding of the transcribed interviews, general aspects of inter-ministerial cooperation, factors that promote inter-ministerial cooperation and factors that hinder inter-ministerial cooperation.
Most informants said that cooperation between health and social ministries and other ministries was both important and a routine. Some informants reported daily or weekly contacts between the ministries. Only a few informants in the three countries expressed poor or no cooperation with the health and social ministry.
The informants indicated both advantages and disadvantages with cooperation. On the one hand, knowledge transfer might be facilitated and the final proposals might be more valuable. On the other hand, cooperation with other ministries takes time from other assignments and was by some officials perceived as “ not giving any cred ”. Cooperation might be felt like a strain when a ministry puts pressure on another ministry in order to achieve a common goal. Often, we who work in this ministry experience that other sectors wish that we should do things, use money and resources. And that's always a dilemma.
The quality of a proposal might also be deteriorated by cooperation because different ministries might have different perspectives on a common issue. A common proposal requires agreement, and this is often achieved by means of vague wordings, which obviously worsens the quality of a proposal. One informant was utterly clear about the misfit in shared written products, in that the health and social ministry asked for more popular expressions than those that were delivered from the actual ministry, which strove for a more strict and professional language.
A number of informants emphasized that political ambitions were crucial for cooperation between the ministries. The introduction of free school meals in Finland many years ago was given as an example. At that time Finland was a relatively poor country, but political convictions triumphed over finances. Clear mandates, anchoring, and documented assignments were other similar promoting factors. In order to get something important forward, it has to be in the government program, you need to have an official group, an official mandate. And then you have a little bit more leverage to make other ministries work towards the same goal. So that needs to be the official structure.
It was helpful to have routines for handling goal conflicts. Different ministries have different interests, and goal conflicts might appear. We have processes for this as well, and goal conflicts and other unsolved issues are lifted stepwise at the ministry until the problem is solved. No question reaches the politicians until all knots are untied, or until suggestions for solutions exist .
Some additional aspects were reported that might promote cooperation between ministries, including shared ownership of an issue, synergies between different sectors, measurements of the outcomes, and marketability.
Several informants mentioned information-related problems, including both information overload and insufficient dissemination of information. Extreme formalizing, complexity and unclear distributions of responsibilities were also mentioned by the informants as hindering factors for cooperation between ministries. I believe that the biggest challenge is the fear of bureaucracy. I think that is a reality. There are so many boards, councils, and networks that people are using a lot of time for. And this government produces, like previous governments, numerous strategies and action plans. Thus, when you are done with one strategy, you start with the next. One cannot expect that officials working with, for example, traffic policy should, uncompelled and voluntarily, search for information regarding their policy area's impact on population health and health equality and at the same time be updated on effects of gender equality and all discrimination aspects. It's too much .
Other themes that emerged as hindering factors were lack of resources, lack of time, lack of competence, lack of knowledge, lack of political will, staff turnover, cultural differences between ministries, and goal conflicts.

Section: 4. Discussion

In the Nordic countries, relative health inequalities have increased more than in other parts of Western Europe ( Mackenbach et al., 2019 ). A vast international literature emphasizes that the reduction of health inequalities requires coordination between different sectors in the society ( Commission on Social Determinants of Health, 2008 ; Ståhl et al., 2006 ). Thus, inter-ministerial cooperation is required at the national level. Accordingly, a lack of such cooperation might explain the lack of progress.
This study demonstrates that in Finland, Norway and Sweden most senior officials at national ministries report inter-ministerial cooperation for public health issues. The officials identified 80 measures that potentially might affect health inequalities and/or health in general. Inter-ministerial cooperation was reported for 65 of these measures.
Reflecting the difficulties that have been reported to achieve cross-sectoral cooperation, the finding of a high degree of inter-ministerial cooperation is somewhat surprising. According to Peters, cooperation is more likely to occur in policy domains in which goals and values are shared among several actors ( Peters, 2015 ). Thus, e.g. in the policy domains of health, unemployment, child poverty, and child and family services, there might be common interests instead of competition between the involved ministries.
Some senior officials were aware of two international policy documents, Agenda 2030 and HiAP. These documents, however, did not seem to have had any major effect on the inter-ministerial cooperation that was reported.
Thus, there was no recorded lack of inter-ministerial cooperation that could explain the lack of progress in the reduction of health inequalities in the Nordic countries. Some potential explanations for this deficiency are discussed in the following.
In the Nordic countries, relative inequalities have increased during the last decades while absolute inequalities have stayed about the same ( Mackenbach et al., 2019 ). The Nordic national policies that aim at the reduction of inequalities in health, do not systematically differentiate between relative and absolute inequalities. However, indistinct definitions cannot explain the lack of progress since neither absolute nor relative inequalities have improved.
The officials that were interviewed might have over-reported measures that involved inter-ministerial cooperation. That possibility, however, is not likely since a large number of measures were reported, including many substantial interventions. Furthermore, the informants often told that inter-ministerial cooperation in general was a routine.
The informants reported 80 measures which they thought would affect health/health inequalities. When these measures were further described the informants often did not explicitly state effects on health/health inequalities. This was more common for informants outside the ministries of health, where explicit statements did not appear for 20/69 measures. This lack might be due to a limited understanding of some public officials of how a measure might affect health and health inequalities. If an informant does not understand how different means affect health and health inequalities, inter-ministerial cooperation might not have any real effect on health. A statement of one of the informants, supports this notion: One cannot expect that officials working with, for example, traffic policy should, uncompelled and voluntarily, search for information regarding their policy area's impact on population health and health equality. Thus, cooperation might be present, yet without any real effect on health. The design of the study, however, does not permit a clear conclusion since the informants were not asked to describe in detail how a given measure was meant to affect health and inequalities in health. Yet, since most of the public officials probably have no training in public health it is unlikely that they would have been able to present such descriptions.
The reported measures might have been insufficient to reduce health inequalities due to lack of extent. Some of the reported measures tackled low employment rates and low incomes. These two approaches have been advocated by e.g. the WHO Regional Office for Europe ( Saunders et al., 2017 ), the Norwegian Directorate of Health (2018) , and the Swedish Commission for Equity in Health ( Lundberg, 2017 ). A theoretical analysis indicates that if the employment rate among low-educated adults were to be increased to the same level as in the high-educated group, this would result in a 3.2% reduction in mortality in the low-educated groups in Finland, Norway, and Sweden ( Eikemo et al., 2014 ). A similar decrease in poverty rates would result in a 6.9% reduction in mortality in the low-educated groups ( Eikemo et al., 2014 ).
In order to increase the employment rate in the low-educated group, a measure needs to be of sufficient magnitude. In Finland, Norway, and Sweden the total adult employment rate remained essentially unchanged during the period 2000–2017 (at about 73.5%) ( OECD, 2018 ). In this period the employment rate in the high-educated group slightly increased to 87.5% in 2014 while in the low-educated group the employment rate decreased, from 62.6% in 2000 to 59.6% in 2017. Therefore, quite substantial efforts are probably needed to increase the employment rate in the low-educated group in order to get to the level of the highly educated. However, the information given by the informant did not indicate that such substantial efforts were planned.
Similar problems apply to poverty reduction . According to the OECD , the rate of poverty (income less than 50% of median income after taxes and transfer payments) in Finland, Norway, and Sweden was essentially unchanged at 26% during the period 2004–2015 ( OECD, 2018 ). Poverty reduction has been on the agenda for a long time, but previous measures have obviously not been sufficient to change the trend. In spite of increased social spending in all three countries, from 23.3% (as a percentage of GDP) in 2000 to 27.7% in 2016, there has been no decreases in the poverty rates. Therefore, it is not apparent that the proposed measures are sufficient to reduce the poverty rate.
Thus, even though measures aimed at unemployment and low income are promising, the proposed measures seem to be insufficient. This might be due to the cost of extensive reforms. Support for this notion is given by Pinto et al. who described how economic considerations influence the implementation of HiAP at the national or provincial level in Sweden, Quebec, and South Australia ( Pinto et al., 2015 ).
Another promising candidate for reducing health inequalities is legislation and taxation on alcohol. In Western Europe, alcohol accounted for 6% of all disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) in 2017 ( Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2018 ). In countries like Sweden, the use of alcohol contributes to inequalities in health ( Ljung et al., 2005 ), and the impact of a potential tax increase is expected to be proportional to its magnitude ( Elder et al., 2010 ). A Finnish study even indicates that taxes affect low-educated people more than high-educated people ( Herttua et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, an umbrella review by Thomson et al. showed that a decreased tax on alcohol led to increased health inequalities ( Thomson et al., 2018 ). Accordingly, a sufficient magnitude of a tax increase will probably decrease inequalities in health. An informant from one of the Swedish ministries reported alcohol tax increase as a measure. In Sweden taxes on alcohol has recently increased (January 2017), but only modestly with 1% for liquors and 4% for other alcoholic beverages ( Ministry of Finance, 2016 ). Despite previous alcohol tax increases (2008, 2014, and 2015), the actual price on alcohol has decreased since 1998 ( Ministry of Finance, 2016 ). Thus, it is questionable if the latest alcohol tax increase will result in detectable effects on health inequalities in Sweden.
Measures aimed at improving employment opportunities for people with limited work capacity, dealing with disability politics and individual placement and support for individuals outside the labor market are valuable. A problem, however, is the limited size of the target group. Even with effective interventions, the effects will probably be too small to be discernible at the population level . Another potential limitation refers to measures that aim at problems that only account for a small part of the burden of disease. For example, behavioral problems in children accounted for only 0.25% of all DALYs lost in Norway 2017 ( Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2018 ). Thus, even if the measures were successful, the effects on the population level would be quite limited.
In spite of these relatively evident shortcomings, the informants reported the measures without any reservations. This might be due to a lack of training in public health of ministry officials, especially outside ministries of health.
A final potential limitation is a lack of evidence of the reported measures. Two recently published studies have reviewed empirical studies ( Thomson et al., 2018 ; Vilhelmsson and Östergren, 2018 ). Thomson et al. assessed primary prevention intervention effects of fiscal measures, regulation, and communication ( Thomson et al., 2018 ). No studies on fiscal measures reached high study quality. Regarding regulation and communication, high-quality studies showed that only water fluoridation and a national tooth-brushing campaign had positive intervention effects ( Thomson et al., 2018 ). Vilhelmsson et al. reviewed measures that aim at reducing health inequalities by means of targeting behavioral factors, and they did not find any intervention to be effective ( Vilhelmsson and Östergren, 2018 ). Based on available information, although vague, it is not obvious that the measures presented in this study include components that might effectively reduce health inequalities.
However, measures with weak evidence were reported, without reservations, in spite of their shortcomings. This might be due to insufficient political commitment to tackle health inequalities.

Section: 5. Limitations and strengths

In all, only officials at 26 ministries were interviewed. Yet, the selection of informants emanated from initial recommendations from a group of senior officials with special responsibilities concerning health that had been appointed by the Nordic Council of Ministers. Therefore, the informants were probably representative.
Four out of 30 selected ministries did not participate. Even though these ministries, i.e. the Ministry of the Environment in Finland, the Ministry of Finance in Norway, and the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education and Research in Sweden, may have reported important initiatives it is unlikely that this limitation would have remarkably refuted our main finding, i.e. a high degree of inter-ministerial cooperation.
The informants' understanding of the concept of health equity might have been insufficient in spite of the information that was sent to the informants before the interviews and the information that was given during the interviews. Yet, this potential lack of understanding could be seen as a result as well as a limitation, and it is unlikely that it disproves our main finding.
The measures that the informants presented were not further analyzed, which limits the conclusions on their extent and effectiveness.
No report on cross-sectoral cooperation at the ministerial level for the development of measures that aim at the reduction of health inequalities has previously been reported.

Section: 6. Conclusions

A substantial number of measures that are intended to promote health equity have been initiated at the national level in Finland, Norway and Sweden. Cooperation between ministries seems to be the rule rather than the exception. Accordingly, lack of inter-ministerial cooperation cannot explain any lack of progress. However, the measures that were reported seemed to be insufficient to reduce health inequalities, both due to lack of extent and lack of effectiveness. This might be due to insufficient political commitment to tackle health inequalities. If so, the WHO Health in All Policies approach might not be effective.

Section: CRediT authorship contribution statement

Karin Guldbrandsson: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Sven Bremberg: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the 30 informants at the 26 ministries in Finland, Norway, and Sweden who gave their time and responded to our questions. We also want to thank Emma Funegård, librarian, and Vicky Bartelink, masters student, who performed the literature searches and carried out a scoping review on cross-sectoral cooperation at the ministerial level in the Nordic countries. The study was financed by the Nordic Councils of Ministers , and the Public Health Agency of Sweden contributed with all overhead costs.
