Title: Becoming skeptical towards vaccines: How health views shape the trajectories following health-related events


Abstract: Abstract

Recent studies on skepticism towards childhood vaccination urge scholars to analyse vaccination trajectories. Focusing on a social group that recent studies point out as being especially relevant because of its relatively high level of skepticism toward childhood vaccination, we use in-depth interviews resembling open conversations to explore how more-educated parents' views on vaccination came about. Providing an in-depth understanding of these vaccine-skepticism trajectories, we additionally analyse 1) how health-related events play a role in parents' trajectories, and 2) how these trajectories are shaped by parents' pre-existing health views. Interviews with 31 more-educated Dutch parents reveal that different types of events incite respondents to start questioning vaccinations. Next to more commonly studied events that directly involve parents' or their children's health (e.g., (perceived) adverse effects of treatments), events that are also related to the topic of health or vaccination but do not involve parents' or their children's health (e.g., when health issues come up in a conversation) may incite parents to start questioning vaccination. Moreover, how respondents experience (different types of) health-related events, and how they go through distinct stages after this, proves shaped by their pre-existing health views: parents with nature-oriented health views came to doubt the fundamental principles of vaccination, turning instead to ‘alternative’ resources and practices; parents with science-oriented views queried the potential risks of vaccination and sought out what they viewed as the most scientifically sound information. We discuss the implications of our findings for scholarly debates and provide suggestions for further research.

Section: 1. Introduction

Recent studies on skepticism towards childhood vaccination urge scholars to focus on “vaccination trajectories” (e.g., Wiley et al., 2020 ) to supplement a large body of research focused on mapping and explaining vaccine-skepticism differences across social groups. To advance our understanding of vaccine skepticism, authors have recommended that future research should begin by examining “vaccination stories ” ( Hausman, 2019 :5; emphasis added) or “ trajectories of non-acceptance” ( Streefland, 2001 :161; emphasis added), and should therefore focus on the question of how individuals become skeptical towards vaccines. Focusing on a social group that recent studies point out as being especially relevant because of its relatively high level of skepticism toward childhood vaccination ( Reich, 2018 ), we use in-depth interviews resembling open conversations to explore how more-educated parents' current views on vaccination came about. With this approach, we aim to account for the high degree of “complexity of vaccination trajectories”, thus adopting a “personalized [research] approach” that scholars indicate as being crucial to understanding “parents’ lived experiences” ( Wiley et al., 2020 :9).
We answer these calls for a more process-based approach by exploring vaccine-skepticism trajectories in-depth, and further contribute by analysing how health-related events play a role in these trajectories. The importance of health-related events in (changing) attitudes towards health care is apparent from studies from different disciplines. These have, for instance, noted the potentially pivotal impact of health-related events such as adverse effects of treatments (e.g., Harmsen et al., 2013 ; Harrison et al., 2015 ), medically unexplained symptoms or illnesses (e.g., Dumit, 2006 ; Moulin et al., 2015 ), and (negative) interactions with health-care professionals (e.g., Mills et al., 2005 ; Reich, 2020a ) on trust in health-care (providers). Others focusing more specifically on vaccination attitudes have found that such events caused some individuals to reconsider both their initially positive or neutral views on vaccination (e.g., Carrion, 2018 ) and other (health-related) parenting practices ( Bobel, 2002 ).
In addition, literature in the fields of cultural sociology, communication studies, and political science shows that how individuals interpret and respond to diverse phenomena, is not universal but shaped by cultural frames or “principles of selection, emphasis and presentation composed of little tacit theories about what exists, what happens, and what matters” ( Gitlin, 1980 :6; also see, e.g., De Koster et al., 2016 ; Hall, 2006 ; Van Noord et al., 2018 ). Integrating this with recent indications that parents hold starkly contrasting views on health (e.g., nature-oriented health views vs. science-oriented views; cf. Attwell et al., 2018 ; Ten Kate et al., 2021 ), suggests that while health-related events may prompt vaccine-skepticism trajectories, how this happens exactly is shaped by individuals’ pre-existing health views.
Following up on the above, we answer the following research question: how do health-related events play a role in vaccine-skepticism trajectories of more-educated Dutch parents, and how are these shaped by parents’ health views?
We conducted in-depth interviews with 31 Dutch parents. Vaccination is widely available and free to access in the Netherlands. This means that decisions about whether to vaccinate their children are made by the parents themselves, which means they have no choice but to adopt a stance on the issue. This makes the Netherlands a strategic case for this study.
Our interviews show that health-related events indeed play a role in vaccine-skepticism trajectories, revealing that different types of events incite respondents to start questioning vaccinations. Notably, next to more commonly studied events that directly involve parents' or their children's health, such as experiencing (perceived) adverse effects of treatments, we show that some of our respondents are induced to question vaccination by events that do not involve their own or their children's health but are related to the topic of health or vaccination, such as discussions with others about vaccination. Moreover, how respondents experience (different types of) health-related events, and how they go through distinct stages after this, proves to be shaped by their pre-existing health views: parents with nature-oriented health views came to doubt the fundamental principles of vaccination, turning instead to ‘alternative’ resources and practices that fit their views better, while parents with science-oriented health views queried the potential risks of vaccination and sought out what they viewed as the most scientifically sound information to answer their questions. This study therefore demonstrates that: 1) different types of health-related events incite parents' vaccine-skepticism trajectories; and 2) pre-existing health views shape both how these events are experienced and how subsequent stages in vaccine-skepticism trajectories take substance.

Section: 2. Research context and method

The municipal health service in the Netherlands invites parents at specific times to have their child(ren) vaccinated. Falling vaccination rates have sparked a societal debate on making vaccination a precondition for accessing childcare services and schools, with vaccination rates against measles falling below the WHO-recommended standard of 95% in 2016–2019. Uptake of the HPV vaccine dropped from 61% to 53.4% in 2016 and 45.5% in 2018. Although recent reports suggest the decline in participation has stabilized, public institutions still voice concern about rising levels of hesitancy and skepticism (see RIVM, 2021 ). In spite of societal discussions, childhood vaccination is not mandatory in the Netherlands. Dutch parents receive an invitation to have their children vaccinated according to the Dutch National Immunisation Programme (NIP), but vaccination is also available to children who are not officially registered. Moreover, participation in the NIP is free of charge for everyone ( RIVM, 2019b ).
As our goal was to study vaccine-skepticism trajectories among more-educated parents, a key inclusion criterion concerned their educational level. We only included parents who were, or had been, skeptical about childhood vaccination and who had attended tertiary education at a university of applied sciences (in Dutch: hogeschool or HBO) or research university (in Dutch: wetenschappelijk onderwijs or WO). Responses to our recruitment messages (also see below) almost exclusively consisted of more-educated parents. When a parent responded who did not meet our criteria, we informed them of this (this only occurred in two cases). As we also included parents who had been skeptical in the past, we did not impose a limit on child age.
Since what vaccination skepticism actually implies varies greatly, ranging from having some doubts about (some) vaccinations to being strongly opposed to the very process, our recruitment sought to achieve diversity in vaccination decisions. We therefore recruited our participants in two stages. We first contacted the Nederlandse Vereniging Kritisch Prikken (translated: “Dutch Association for Being Critical towards Vaccines”; in short, NVKP). The NVKP is a Dutch organisation with a national membership, that was established in 1994 and is “open to anyone with questions and problems related to childhood vaccination” ( NVKP, n.d. ). The organisation is not bound to any specific region (or religion) in the Netherlands, although it does organise local events and maintains contact with similar organisations from other countries. Among its goals are the provision of information about its views on: disease, vaccination, and the consequences of vaccination; alternatives to vaccination; and freedom of choice and individual responsibility. In addition, the organisation stimulates societal acceptance of what it views as vaccine damage, and the registration of (perceived) harmful effects of vaccines. Means by which the organisation aims to achieve this are (among others): distributing newsletters, listing (alternative) practitioners on their website, following and collecting relevant medical literature, collecting and providing funds to actors that can contribute to the organisation's goals, and offering means for members to connect (e.g. through social media) ( NVKP, n.d. ).
We anticipated that NVKP members would be distrustful of representatives from institutions like universities (i.e., scientific researchers). Consequently, we initially approached the NVKP's leaders, who helped us to amend our contact message by adding information about our academic affiliations and the university's role in the study. Subsequently, our message was posted in the NVKP's Facebook group by its moderator. The first author was present online at the time the message was posted, to be able to answer people's questions about the message and the research project in real time. Ultimately, we were able to recruit 10 respondents who are vocal about their distrust of vaccination and the institutions involved. A similar message was circulated in schools based on anthroposophical teachings (i.e., a philosophy founded by Rudolf Steiner that assumed the existence of an objective spiritual world that is accessible to humans, which is implemented in education by a focus on arts, attention to personal growth, stimulating a sense of community and an integrated approach to education; e.g., see, Uhrmacher, 1995 ), which resulted in the recruitment of six more parents. This first step thus ensured we recruited respondents who are typically regarded as hard to reach by scholars, such as “activist non-vaccinators who might be more strident but [mistrust] [researchers'] motives” ( Wiley et al., 2020 ).
The second step was aimed at reaching parents who are less outspokenly against vaccination and may just have some doubts about vaccinating their children. We reached this group by distributing messages at schools and day-care facilities and posting on online parenting communities and websites. These schools and day-care facilities (a total of 37) were located in different parts of the Netherlands, ranging from the most urbanized regions (in Dutch: the ‘Randstad’) to more rural areas in the East, North and South of the Netherlands. In areas of the country that are known for their anthroposhopical communities (more specifically the cities of Zutphen and Zeist and their surroundings), a relatively large number of flyers was distributed (total: 18) since we expected there would be more vaccine-skeptical parents there. Schools and day-care facilities were contacted in different ways: while some were approached ‘offline’ (by a visit from the first author), other were requested to distribute flyers over email and/or over the phone. The recruitment process was brought to an end when the interviews no longer generated any new themes (i.e., when theoretical saturation was achieved). Ultimately, we interviewed 31 more-educated parents, whose views ranged from (at some point) experiencing doubts about vaccination to being firmly against it. More specifically, ten respondents indicated they had refused all vaccinations for one, some, or all of their children, nine had opted to partially vaccinate one, some, or all of their children, and 12 had opted for full (if sometimes delayed) vaccination. Eight parents preferred to be interviewed as a couple. 23 of our respondents were female, while eight were male. Respondents' age ranged from 27 to 60 at the time of the interview, with an average age of 43. An overview of our respondents and their vaccine-skepticism trajectories is presented in the Online Supplement.
Their finding that vaccination trajectories vary across parents led Wiley et al. (2020 : p. 2) to recommend a “nuanced personalized engagement with non-vaccinating parents” rather than a “one-size-fits-all approach” that relies on pre-determined (answer) categories. In view of both this and established methodological literature's endorsement of qualitative interviews for acquiring an in-depth knowledge of individuals' (changing) attitudes ( Charmaz, 2014 ), we conducted open, inductive interviews that included a ‘biographical approach’: the respondents were asked to talk about their views on vaccination and how they had developed over time. This enabled the interviewees to elaborate on how they understand their vaccine skepticism, thus shedding light on “people's own (retrospective) understanding of how [their] process unfolded subjectively” ( Harambam, 2017 :143).
The issue of non-vaccination is socially controversial in the Netherlands, illustrated by often polarized discussions in the media and public space between “pro” and “anti” vaccination groups (see, e.g., Pierik and Verweij, 2017 ). This is also visible in places where individuals who are skeptical towards vaccines come together, particularly online, and seek like-minded people and share information and support in Facebook groups, online fora, etc. Interaction between skeptical individuals and people who support vaccination is often polarized, and often centers on discussions about obligating vaccination at daycare facilities and/or schools, and on interests of the individual and the community.
Given this context, it can be difficult to talk about this issue with an outsider. To address this, the first author (who conducted the interviews) invested time and effort at the start of each interview to make the respondents comfortable and ensure they did not feel judged. This for instance included answering questions about the first author's motivations for the research and the research goals, emphasizing her genuine interest in the experiences and perspectives of the respondents. It also meant that the first author suspended any judgment on the issue of vaccination (including its usefulness, desirability, etc.). When explicitly asked, the first author answered questions as to whether she was vaccinated herself as a child and her own thoughts about childhood vaccination, while simultaneously making sure to stress her position and aim as a (cultural-sociological) researcher: the goal of the interviews was to hear about parents' views and their opinions, and not to ‘test’, judge, legitimize or commend these or their decisions, which we deemed especially important in light of the controversial character of the topic.
To further ensure parents felt comfortable, they were given the chance to decide the location of the interview beforehand themselves. In all but two cases, this resulted in face-to-face interviews at respondents’ homes, and in two cases the first author met with a parent in a restaurant or café. During and after the interviews, participants all said they had experienced the interviews as very pleasant and open and that they felt free to share their stories. The benefit of our approach was also illustrated by the course of the interviews: the parents were sometimes guarded at the start, but then increasingly felt safe enough to share more personal and in-depth stories. The average interview duration of 1 h 45 min (the shortest was a little over an hour and the longest over 6 h) and the invitations for lunch and dinner received by the first author are further indications of a positive rapport.
The interviews took place between March 2019 and February 2020, i.e., before the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in the Netherlands. Before participating in an interview, each respondent gave their written informed consent using a form that detailed the goals and main interview themes (i.e., their views and decisions regarding vaccination) and information on how the data would be used and stored. There was also a section where the participants were asked to confirm they had understood what they were told. They were encouraged to ask any questions they had via both the form and email, and the interviewer again checked their understanding and consent before starting the interviews. In taking these steps, we followed the ethical guidelines established by the Netherlands Sociological Association (NSV) and The Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU). Approval from a research ethics committee was not required when we collected our data.
The verbatim transcripts of the interviews (887 pages in total) were analysed using ATLAS.ti. The first author coded the transcripts and compared them iteratively with relevant theories (cf. Glaser and Strauss, 1967 ). Open coding generated an initial 284 codes, which were narrowed down to 143 through constant comparison. These codes mainly referred to different health views and their underlying assumptions (e.g., nature-oriented health views and ideas about what is considered natural and what is not), elements and characteristics of different phases respondents went through in their development of vaccine-skeptical attitudes (e.g., different sources respondents used to look for information), and vaccination decisions (e.g., delayed vaccination), and were categorised in accordance with the different trajectories uncovered and the underlying stages (“axial coding”; see Charmaz, 2014 ).
The analysis was primarily conducted by the first author, in close collaboration with the co-authors and members of the research group by way of frequent discussions. Notes on the interactions during the interviews were also discussed among the authors and coded interpretatively. We interpreted preliminary findings using different theoretical concepts during the data collection and analysis, ranging from Becker's ideas on ‘deviant careers’ ( Becker, 1963 ; Harambam, 2017 ; Kemmers et al., 2016 ) and literature on health-related events and ‘cues’ to vaccine refusal (e.g., Carrion, 2018 Dumit, 2006 ; Harmsen et al., 2013 ) and natural approaches to health (cf., Attwell et al., 2018 ; Bobel, 2002 ; Fionda and Furnham, 2014 ; Ten Kate et al., 2021 ; Ward et al., 2017 ), to Reich's work on motivations behind vaccine refusal and how vaccine-refusing individuals cope with stigma (see, Reich, 2018 , 2020a , 2020b ). Based on this, small adjustments were made to what themes were discussed during interviews. Data collection and analysis thus took the form of an iterative process.

Section: 3. Findings

During the interviews, all the respondents described experiencing a health-related event that triggered them to question vaccination. Like the findings of recent studies on “cues” of non-vaccination (e.g., Carrion, 2018 ), all of the parents we interviewed recounted “being triggered” (Chris) by something or someone to look into vaccination or “encouraged to start thinking for the first time (…) about the option of not vaccinating” (Mabel), while they “never even thought about [not vaccinating] before” (e.g., Katie, Michelle and Elsemieke). What such a trigger actually entailed varied. Some parents talked about a negative or emotional experience or health issue in the health-care system directly involving their own or their children's health, resembling what is sometimes referred to in extant literature as a ‘health event’ ( Seys et al., 2013 ). Annie, for instance, explained how her youngest son stopped breathing after being vaccinated earlier in the day: “It was really intense. And the doctors didn't know what it was at all, but the paramedics said ‘Oh, it was the vaccine.’” This traumatic experience and subsequent contact with medical professionals, whom Annie experienced as unsympathetic and unhelpful, raised questions for her about the safety of vaccination. This finding of being triggered by an event that directly involves one's own or a loved one's health relates to a broader literature, which stresses the importance of events ranging from experiencing adverse reactions (e.g, Mills et al., 2005 ) to negative interactions with health-care professionals (e.g., Bobel, 2002 ; Harsh et al., 2016 ; Reich, 2020a ) in inspiring distrust in health care in general and/or vaccination more specifically.
Other parents, however, discussed an event that not directly involved their or their children's health. Sophie, for instance, described coming into contact with “people who questioned vaccination, who didn't think it was self-evident” through her education in homeopathy (i.e., an often labelled as ‘alternative’ form of medicine based on the idea that a substance that causes particular symptoms of a disease can cure similar symptoms of illness and makes use of homeopathic dilutions; e.g., see, Merell and Shalts, 2002 ). Similarly, Jennifer recalled how her yoga teacher advised her “to really think about it before she vaccinated [her son]” after she had just given birth, which made Jennifer realise that she did not think “it was okay that vaccination was sort of self-evident” and that she wanted to “decide for [her]self if [her son] would be vaccinated”. This suggests that events directly involving (problems with) parents' own or their children's health do not constitute the only type of experience that can trigger parents to start questioning vaccination, but that other events related to the topic of health or vaccination (e.g., during social interactions or in sources such as books) can serve as an equally significant inception of vaccination trajectories.
The notion of events serving as ‘triggers’ that set into motion a subsequent process resonates with what Becker called ‘deviant careers’, which are incited by an introduction to non-mainstream behaviour, ideas or milieus. In this strand of literature, such ‘careers’ or trajectories are taken as a focal point of study, resulting in analyses of how (deviant) trajectories unfold in different stages, including how social groups that are labelled as ‘deviant’ deal with being labelled this way by the outside world, or, in other words, how they deal with stigmatisation (cf. Becker, 1963 ; Harambam, 2017 ; Kemmers et al., 2016 ).
However, as we demonstrate below, our respondents' accounts of how they experienced or interpreted a health-related event, and how their subsequent trajectories unfolded, were not uniform, but instead shaped by differences in their views on health, which have been previously identified in recent research. While some participants held what we call a ‘nature-centred’ view, which we conceptualize as aiming to protect the natural state of things and therefore adopting the most ‘natural’ approach to health-related matters (as described in extant research, e.g., see, Attwell et al., 2018 ; Bobel, 2002 ; Fionda and Furnham, 2014 ; Ten Kate et al., 2021 ; Ward et al., 2017 ), others held what we call a ‘science-centred’ view, which refers to making health decisions by critically assessing and questioning the scientific evidence behind each option (cf. Ten Kate et al., 2021 ). Generally, we found that each respondent adopted one of these two (often strongly-felt) health views. In some cases, however, a nature-oriented respondent occasionally used a more science-oriented argument as a rhetorical device, to justify their vaccine-related decisions in a setting where they felt this would be considered more acceptable (e.g., in response to someone who they felt would dismiss nature-oriented views).
Below, we discuss how these health views first shaped parents’ interpretations of health-related events, and, second, the trajectories that are set into motion thereafter.
Central to what we call a ‘nature-centred’ view on health (cf. Attwell et al., 2018 ; Bobel, 2002 ; Ten Kate et al., 2021 ; Ward et al., 2017 ), several parents aimed to protect and strengthen natural health processes and avoid unnatural or ‘chemical’ interventions as much as possible. Those with such a perspective frequently described a health-related event that caused them to question what the (medical) scientific community considers to be the fundamental principles and benefits of vaccination. These events were experienced as “awakening” and “really shaking things up” (Sophie), or as making the parent realise that “vaccines can't bring about actually functioning immunity” (Babette).
Explicitly referencing her pre-existing views on health when asked how her vaccination journey started, Eliza described being “really woken up” during her first pregnancy by the content in a magazine she had been subscribed to for years that focused on “a lot of alternative things, spiritual things.” This made her realise that “vaccination was just nonsense” and “dangerous to your health.” Similarly, Mabel discussed how experiencing health issues of her own at the age of 23 caused her to “start delving deeper into health” and “alternatives (…) to pharmaceuticals and pills” such as homeopathic remedies. Years later, she “really started to think [about vaccination],” which she felt she “could no longer trust,” when she “read something about the Hep-B vaccination” in a book by a doctor promoting natural remedies. Illustrative of how pre-existing, nature-centred health views can shape how parents experience a health-related event, Eliza, Mabel and several others spoke about how they had come to regard vaccination as “unnatural.”
Although many of the parents talked about the more general nature-centred health views they had acquired earlier in life when asked to elaborate on their vaccination story, they also stressed that they had never ‘consciously’ thought about the specific issue of (non) vaccination before being triggered to do so. Chris, for instance, explained how his previous involvement in “holistic health” instilled a “certain perspective on what a healthy human being should be like.” Nonetheless, it was not until years later, when he and his wife were expecting their daughter, that a comment from their neighbours “opened [his] eyes to (…) the truth about [vaccination]” and he started to apply his previously acquired health views to vaccination. Similarly, Eliza mentioned that in the 1990s, years before she first got pregnant, she was already reading magazines “about spiritual things” and “alternative foods”, while reading a book on the potential disadvantages of vaccination triggered her to “start to dive into [vaccination].”
Questioning the benefits of vaccination, parents embarked on a search for answers. For those with a nature-centred worldview, this was mostly driven by intuition. When asked how she assessed whether information was reliable, Layla said she “just focused on [her] own feelings.” This approach was similar to that of Katie, who described having “a really strong intuition” that she used to determine “what's right according to my feelings, and what isn't right.” Moreover, the sources and information they searched for mostly reflected their pre-existing views on health, such as information based on anthroposophical teachings or distributed by those with homeopathic or holistic (i.e., a type of health care that takes the physical, emotional, social, economic and spirituals needs of a patient into account; e.g., see, Ventegodt et al., 2016 ) views on health. For some of the nature-centred respondents, this went hand-in-hand with a distrust of information from scientific or governmental institutions like the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), which Mabel felt “had been exposed” as “not acting in the interests of the people” and Vicki said “didn't give all the information.”
Following up on their sparked skepticism about vaccination, nature-centred parents' quests were mostly focused on finding out more about “what is true [about vaccination]” (Annette) and “the whole theory behind vaccination” (Chris). This hunt for information on vaccination often meant that these respondents delved deeper into the field of what is regarded as ‘alternative’ medicine, e.g., based on homeopathic or anthroposophical principles, which most of these parents were familiar with before their vaccination research. Some described this as a very intense process, like Babette, who explained that, during this process, she had “wrestled with [the question of whether to vaccinate] for years, lay awake at night, read, had ethical dilemmas and (…) had to rewrite [her] entire paradigm.” Mabel, who also found the process “overwhelming,” added that “when you really dive into it, you just discover so much.” For most of these parents, these discoveries confirmed their skepticism and impression that vaccination “doesn't make sense at all” (Chris) or “actually damages the immune system” (Babette).
After researching the issue of vaccination for what was often a long period of time, parents with nature-centred views acquired a new perspective on vaccination: it was seen as “unnatural” and “damaging” to health in general, and the immune system more specifically. This new viewpoint was applied to both future and past experiences with vaccination and issues that the parents felt were related. Elaborating on how her newly-acquired views on vaccination made her feel differently about her past decision to give her daughter her first vaccines, Sara for instance said: “When I look back at that time, I think: How could I have been so naive? How could I have [vaccinated her]? Sometimes I really blame myself [for giving my daughter the first vaccines].” Many parents not only re-interpreted their own circumstances, but also the world around them. As Babette put it, she “just start[ed] to see it … start[ed] looking through those glasses. Fine motor skills, gross motor skills, speech issues, dyslexia, ADHD, autism. And [it's not like this] never occurs in unvaccinated children, but it's just so much less prevalent.” For some parents, this broader perspective included views on the economy, politics and life in general. As Robin explained, she started “putting it all together. All the pieces of the puzzle. And then [she] started to understand, to become aware of what is actually going on in this world.”
The respondents' newly-acquired views on vaccination were confirmed by their subsequent experiences with ‘conventional’ and ‘alternative’ medicine. Several stated that vaccination was “just not something [doctors] wanted to talk about” (Vicki) and medical professionals “were really pushy” (Annette). For some, these experiences confirmed that ‘regular’ doctors “only repeat what [they] hear and see, what [they] were taught as a doctor”, which made conversations with them (about vaccination) “really difficult” (Sophie). Several parents therefore “just went and looked for someone else” because, as Katie explained: “If I can't go to [the GP] when it comes to [vaccination], and [the GP] doesn't take that seriously … then there's really no point [in going].” Having sought out a homeopathic doctor instead, Katie felt that “homeopathic and holistic doctors just look at the cause much more,” which “just appealed to [her] more.”
Interactions with ‘regular’ health care professionals and experiences with ‘alternative’ professionals thus validated and strengthened these parents' views on health, which were centred more on strengthening “the natural immune system” by “looking at the person as a whole” (Katie); this was contrasted to ‘regular’ health care, which was regarded as “just targeting symptoms” (Chris) or trying to prevent “[diseases] that can actually be good for you” by using means like vaccination that “are potentially harmful” (Sophie).
Nature-centred parents were very much aware that their views were not seen as legitimate by (some) other people, both in the health-care system and their social networks (cf. Wiley et al., 2021 ). To avoid direct stigmatisation, many of the respondents said that they were always very careful and selective when deciding whether to disclose their views on vaccination to others. When they did, some parents supported them with arguments they believed would be accepted more easily by others. Mabel, for instance, said she looked up sources and arguments to support her decisions that were “die-hard science” because “[while I] believe in (…) spiritual soft-boiled eggs, [I] know the rest of the Netherlands wants nothing to do with that. So [I] needed someone who is higher up, who has ‘professor’ in front of their name, who's at an institution that's trusted.” By using a discourse they felt was regarded as more ‘legitimate’, some of the parents thus sought to defend their choices to the outside world and mitigate any stigmatisation they might otherwise attract.
This strategy was not, however, used by all the respondents with nature-centred views. Those who were more dissatisfied with and/or estranged from ‘regular’ (health-care) institutions, for example because of very negative experiences, described seeking out like-minded people and alternatives to ‘regular’ health and child care, instead of trying to be accepted by others who did not share their views. Ray, for instance, explained that he became “a member of the NVKP” because “that provides [him] with support.” Vicki said she “didn't feel heard” by her GP when she felt her daughter had been negatively affected by vaccination, and now prefers a homeopathic doctor over a paediatrician “because then [she] would[n't] get the same problem as [she] had [with her GP].” Sara similarly said she “went to a children's health centre based on anthroposophical views” instead of a ‘regular’ one because she “felt really alone and judged back then.” A few parents took a more confrontational approach (cf. Reich, 2020b ) and had started sharing their views and trying to achieve (social) change, for instance by studying ‘alternative’ therapies to try to “coach others and remove blockages” or to “commit [her]self completely against vaccination (…) to achieve change and awareness” (Robin).
In contrast to the parents with nature-centred views, other respondents explained that their health-care decisions were based on critical evaluations of the quality of the scientific evidence, and then ideally choosing the option that they believed had the strongest scientific basis (cf. Ten Kate et al., 2021 ). The parents with such science-centred views mostly described their experience of a health-related event as something that had made them question the safety and potential risks of vaccination, and not necessarily its benefits or principles as communicated by scientific sources.
Michael, for instance, stressed that he and his wife “believe[d] in the principle of vaccination” communicated by medical science and institutions, but felt “apprehensive about things that could go wrong” after attending an information session at the children's health-care centre when they were expecting their first child. Similarly, Faye said that stories about girls becoming ill after receiving the HPV vaccine around the time of its introduction “really triggered something,” causing her to decide not to give it to her daughter because of her “worries about side-effects” and perception that her “12-year-old daughter was basically a guinea pig.” Nevertheless, she was keen to stress that she viewed a blanket rejection of vaccination as “unwise”, because she was convinced that vaccines are very good at “protecting children so they don't get ill.”
For the parents with science-oriented health views, experiencing a health-related event generally incited concerns about vaccines not being completely safe and free of risk. However, in contrast to the experiences described by nature-oriented respondents, it did not cause any fundamental questioning of scientific explanations on vaccination, immunity and health more broadly.
In order to answer the questions that arose after experiencing a health-related event, science-oriented parents looked for more information on the potential risks of vaccination preferably from sources they perceived to be “as scientific as possible” (Zoe). This is illustrated by the preference of these for “sources like PubMed” in their search for information “supported by scientific articles” (Annie). Similarly, Zoe said she read books “to have things scientifically substantiated” and much preferred sources that are “completely scientific, medical” over those that “aren't scientifically detailed.”
As well as seeking out scientific articles and other written resources, these parents made a great effort to contact scientific experts. In particular, they favoured experts of the highest scientific quality and regard: Faye explained that she “spoke to people who really know [about vaccination]” and “people with a medical background,” because she felt “there was no point in just talking to my next-door neighbour [laughing].” Gwen spoke about looking for more information by contacting “people [she] rated highly,” like “the doctor at the children's health-care centre, but also the professor who did the [fertility treatment].” She also joined a Facebook group where “real scientists” explained “the real story” and shared “scientific pieces.” Some parents were critical of, or hesitant about, professionals they feared would not have enough expertise on the issue of vaccination (e.g., GPs). One mother, for instance, said she felt “much more comfortable” talking about vaccination with the paediatrician at the children's health-care centre than with her GP, who she believed “was not very well-informed” and “couldn't say exactly what was in those vaccines” (Zoe).
To answer the questions about vaccination that had arisen after experiencing a health-related event, parents with science-oriented views thus aimed to use scientific avenues to search for information they deemed to be of (sufficient) scientific quality.
The extensive search for scientific sources often went hand-in-hand with the parents coming to see risk and uncertainty as inherent to vaccination and health care, as well as to science more generally. This re-interpretation centred on two related ideas: 1) that it is not possible for science to ever prove something beyond any doubt; and 2) that there are (harmful) side-effects with all forms of pharmaceuticals (including vaccines). Many respondents described a struggle with what they view as the limitations of science. Crystal, for example, said she came to realise that “all of us tend to overestimate science,” because it can only offer “temporary truths.” After attending a medical convention, where she heard about the medical community discovering a new organ, Zoe said this validated her sense that (medical) science could not offer her certainty: “I thought [doctors] had all that figured out already [laughing]! Yeah, you know, there's so much we don't know yet. And then I think: how can you say that a vaccine that's been introduced 40 years ago (…) is safe now? How do you know?!”
The uncertainty that these parents had come to see as inherent to science was also extended to broader views on pharmaceuticals (and vaccines) by some of them. Crystal, for instance, worried “that the effects of medications are often not known,” while Elsemieke said she felt increasingly ambivalent towards pharmaceuticals in general after her search for more information on (the risks of) vaccination: “What I never knew is that … many drugs are of course just a fluke.” Parents had different ways of dealing with this sense that risk is an unavoidable aspect of science and vaccination. The hesitancy of some parents towards vaccination was enduring, leaving them feeling unable to make a decision. In a few cases, this meant parents postponed vaccination to give themselves more time to try to achieve greater certainty about which decision posed the least risk. When explaining why she decided to delay vaccinating her child, Zoe said that, in her view, “[scientists] don't know what the long-term effects are … that really scares me.” Others chose not to give their children the HPV vaccine (e.g., Faye) or others about which they felt less confident, but did permit some that they believed carried less risk. A few parents instead embraced science and tried to use it to mitigate their uncertainty, employing whatever the scientific means at their disposal to lower the perceived risks for their children. Gwen, who was initially hesitant about vaccination but then changed her mind and administered all the recommended vaccinations, for instance said she eventually decided to give her son additional vaccines that were not part of the NIP “for extra safety,” like “the chickenpox (…) because when you read about it, you see that they do give it in other countries. And you could die from chickenpox, the chance isn't very big, but it's possible.”
Parents who focused on assessing the potential risks of vaccination during their information-seeking journey thus came to see it and science as inherently uncertain. For some, this lessened their trust in (medical) science, as exemplified by the postponement of decisions and/or the creation of personalized vaccination schedules, while others embraced science further as a solution to this uncertainty.
When it came to dealing with the reactions of the outside world to their vaccine attitudes, science-oriented parents, like parents with nature-oriented views, also often believed that they are portrayed and treated negatively. Annie felt that she and others who choose not to administer all the recommended vaccines are portrayed as “anti-vaxx crazies” in the media. Zoe, meanwhile, indicated she had created “a fake profile” for when she looked on social media for more information, because she “didn't want to be out there with my own name” and “there's a real witch hunt going on against so-called ‘anti-vaxxers.’”
In an effort to reduce this sense of stigmatisation, these respondents not only avoided disclosing their views on vaccination to people they felt would react negatively (like nature-oriented parents did), but also tried to distance themselves from those they referred to as “anti-vaxx crazies.” One way of doing this was comparing themselves to ‘others’ who were seen as “extremely fanatical” (Gwen), while parents characterized themselves as “just thinking consciously and critically” (Elsemieke). In this manner, they made a distinction between ‘anti-vaxxers’ who were seen as having ‘irrational beliefs’ in for instance “experience stories” and “wishy-washy stuff” (Zoe), and their own ‘rational’ approach, which was viewed as more in line with a ‘mainstream’ way of thinking.
As well as focusing on a distinction between ‘irrational belief’ and ‘rational doubt’, some science-oriented parents stressed they did see benefits of vaccination, unlike others, who they called “fanatical anti-vaxxers” (Gwen). Crystal said she often explained to others that she “believe[d] that we have a lot to benefit from the fact that many people have taken vaccines for years,” which, according to her, meant that she could not be characterized “as some kind of conspiracy thinker.” In a similar way, while Toon and Kristel said they felt it was “important to consciously read about [vaccination], so that when you make a decision, you know what you're doing and what the risks are,” they were nevertheless convinced that “vaccines had proven their worth” and that “the [vaccination] programme was created for a good reason.”
In summary, science-oriented parents aimed to mitigate stigma by choosing not to share their opinions, or by distinguishing themselves from a group they viewed as ‘irrational’ and ‘fanatical anti-vaxxers,’ who did not see any benefits of vaccination.

Section: 4. Conclusions

Using in-depth interviews with 31 parents who were, or had been, skeptical towards vaccination, we demonstrate that their vaccine-skepticism trajectories were incited by a health-related event and shaped by their pre-existing health views. This not only adds to the extant body of research that has identified factors influencing vaccine skepticism, but particularly answers calls by scholars to add a focus on “vaccination trajectories” (e.g., Wiley et al., 2020 ; cf. Hausman, 2019 ; Streefland, 2001 ). Additionally, our findings resonate with research that highlights the crucial role of health-related events or “cues” (e.g., Carrion, 2018 ).
Mirroring studies with a focus on health-related events that directly involved someone's health, such as the experience of (perceived) adverse effects of treatments (e.g., Harmsen et al., 2013 ), multiple interviewees in our research described how such events triggered them to question vaccination. Adding to this, other respondents instead talked about events that did not involve their own health or that of their loved ones, but were related to the topic of health or vaccination, e.g., when the issue of vaccination came up on conversation or in materials used for informational purposes. As our findings demonstrate, even though the latter category of events does not directly involve the experience of health problems or official health care institutions, they prove to be relevant in triggering trajectories of vaccine skepticism among our respondents. Building upon this finding, future studies could scrutinise in more detail under what circumstances and for whom different types of events play a role in (trajectories of) vaccine skepticism and other health attitudes.
These different types of health-related events set in motion a process in which parents searched for information, re-interpreted vaccination based on what they discovered, and found ways of dealing with the reactions of the outside world to their newly acquired perspective (see Fig. 1 ). Each of these stages has a broader relevance to literature on vaccine skepticism, vaccine communication, stigma and broader health behaviour. Download: Download high-res image (289KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . How health views shape trajectories following health-related events.
First, our study shows that how events are interpreted and how the subsequent trajectory unfolds depend on parents' pre-existing views about health. While some of our respondents took their preference for the most ‘natural’ approach to health as a guideline (i.e., a ‘nature-centred’ view; cf. Attwell et al., 2018 ; Ten Kate et al., 2021 ), others used their perception of the quality of scientific evidence to make health decisions (i.e., a ‘science-centred’ view; cf. Ten Kate et al., 2021 ). While the event caused the former group to question the fundamental principles of vaccination and turn to ‘alternative’ resources and practices that reflected their views better, the latter came to question the potential risks of vaccination and used (their perception of) scientific evidence as the basis for their search for information and their (changing) views on vaccination. This elucidates the variation in our respondents' vaccination decisions. Most notably, the parents with nature-centred views more often chose to reject vaccination entirely or selectively vaccinate. The science-oriented parents, meanwhile, instead more often opted to either delay or fully vaccinate their children, as they still trusted the basic principles communicated by medical institutions, but nevertheless questioned the (unknown) risks.
In relation to information-seeking behaviour, we found that our respondents used channels that reflected their pre-existing views. This resonates more with the notion of confirmation bias ( Meppelink et al., 2019 ) and the idea that values shape how they deal with information (i.e., cultural cognition; e.g., Kahan et al., 2009 , 2010 ), than with the idea that vaccine skepticism is the result of consuming (mis)information (e.g., Kata, 2010 ; Pluviano et al., 2017 ). Consequently, public-information campaigns on vaccination need to take these health views into account (cf., Lazić and Žeželj, 2021 ), as they probably shape how such communications are perceived (cf., Kahan et al., 2010 ).
Finally, our interviewees indicated they often experience stigmatisation, but like a recent study on the experience of stigmatisation among non-vaccinating parents in Australia ( Wiley et al., 2021 ), we found that parents use various strategies to deal with this. Like previous studies (e.g., Reich, 2020b ), we identified that some prefer not to disclose their views to avoid stigma, while others are more vocal and others still actively try to change other people's minds (cf. “witnessing”; Bobel, 2002 :146–147). Moreover, while our nature-centred respondents tended to turn to alternatives to ‘regular’ health care when they experienced stigmatisation, those with science-centred views generally used commonly accepted rhetoric to carve out a path through ‘mainstream’ institutions. This suggests that the reactions of health-care professionals can play an important role in individuals' vaccine-skepticism trajectories (cf. Mills et al., 2005 ; Reich, 2020a ). Achieving a greater understanding of such dynamics may be useful for identifying ways of establishing or maintaining contact with vaccine-skeptical parents, and would thus be a fruitful avenue for future research.
This study shows that pre-existing health views shape both how events are experienced, and how the subsequent stages of vaccine-skepticism trajectories are formed. Applying this finding more generally to issues other than vaccination could generate significant insights into how a wide variety of health-related events can trigger processes shaped by pre-existing views. These events might range from experiencing medically unexplained symptoms (see, e.g., Dumit, 2006 ) to (perceived) unequal health-care treatment (see, e.g., Bhatt, 2013 ), or simply events related to other types of vaccinations (e.g., against COVID-19). This may help us to understand why specific triggers ultimately cause some individuals to move away from ‘mainstream’ (health-care) institutions, immersing themselves in what is commonly considered to be the ‘alternative’ milieu, while others delve deeper into the science behind health issues and try to navigate ‘mainstream’ institutions to find a solution to their issues. Our study could therefore serve as a stepping stone for future research, adding to our understanding of how people make decisions in the broader field of health behaviour.

Section: CRediT author statement

Josje ten Kate : Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Visualization. Willem de Koster : Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Jeroen van der Waal : Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Section: Funding

This work was supported by Vidi grants awarded to Willem de Koster and Jeroen van der Waal by the Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (NWO) (Grant Nos. 016.Vidi.185.207 and 452-17-009).

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

We are sincerely grateful for the valuable feedback on earlier versions of our paper, provided by three anonymous reviewers and by participants in the Cultural Sociology Lowlands conference and the Erasmus Institute on Culture and Stratification research seminar.
