Title: Reclaiming Mountain Lake: Applying environmental repossession in Biigtigong Nishnaabeg territory, Canada


Abstract: Abstract

The concept of environmental repossession responds to a global movement led by Indigenous peoples to reclaim their territories and ways of life. As Indigenous wellness is intimately tied to relationships to land, processes of environmental repossession are a means to revitalize knowledge systems, identities and relationships that foster strong and healthy communities. Due to historic and ongoing forces of dispossession, the Anishinaabe community of Biigtigong Nishnaabeg has experienced limited access to Mountain Lake, a culturally and historically significant place in their ancestral territory. In the summer of 2018, the Chief and Council of Biigtigong constructed two cabins along the shores of Mountain Lake for community use and, one year later, hosted a week-long camp to bring Elders , youth and band staff together in this place. Drawing from 15 in-depth interviews with participating community members, this study documented the planning and implementation of the cabins and camp at Mountain Lake and examined the community meanings of this process. The findings suggest that the cabins and camp functioned as a local process of environmental repossession through multiple and interconnected steps to reclaim access to Mountain Lake, reintroduce the community to this place and begin remaking community relationships to this land. As Indigenous communities globally seek to reclaim their territories and rights to land, this article speaks to the tensions of this work and the structures that support its practice locally.

Section: 1. Introduction

Across the globe, Indigenous communities are pursuing strategies to reclaim their lands and reconnect with the knowledges tied to these places. The concept of environmental repossession seeks to describe these land reclamation processes and situate them within Indigenous worldviews and experiences of health ( Big-Canoe and Richmond, 2014 ). For Indigenous peoples, wellness is inextricably linked to the land of their ancestral territories ( King et al., 2009 ; Richmond and Ross, 2009 ; Wilson, 2003 ). The Land is considered more than a physical landscape. It is an animate being with agency, a relative, provider and teacher with whom Indigenous peoples hold sacred relationships of responsibility ( Styres, 2017 ; Daigle, 2016 ). These relationships form the basis of complex knowledge systems and hold the teachings that sustain physical, mental, emotional and spiritual wellness ( Battiste and Youngblood, 2000 ). By strengthening access to and restoring connections with Land, Indigenous communities are addressing their contemporary health and social needs. While the goals of environmental repossession may be similar across communities, the strategies implemented respond to the unique contexts of individual communities ( Tobias and Richmond, 2016 ).
Despite the promise of environmental repossession as a framework to explore active processes to reclaim, reoccupy and reconnect to Land ( Hatala et al., 2019 ; Tobias and Richmond, 2016 ), few studies have documented how strategies of repossession are applied by communities, nor what the enactment of these strategies mean for those involved. In partnership with Biigtigong Nishnaabeg, this article presents the results of an ongoing study to describe the community's actions to reclaim and reconnect with its ancestral territory. Drawing from interviews and story collection with youth, Elders and staff of Biigtigong's Department of Sustainable Development, this research documents the development and implementation of a process of environmental repossession at Mountain Lake, Ontario , and explores community meanings of this process. This research draws attention to the significance of environmental repossession as an applied community effort and identifies the tensions and lessons that can arise when repossession is put into practice.
It is well established that Indigenous meanings of health must be conceptualised within a broader context of wellness, place and culture, and that these elements are intimately connected to Land ( Friendship and Furgal, 2012 ; Durie, 2004 ). In Anishinaabe communities, the principles of mino-bimaadiziwin (living a good life) situate health within the relationality that connects self, family, community and environment. Indigenous health geography emerged out of this paradigm shift; researchers in this area call for place-based understandings of wellness that are grounded in the unique knowledge systems, cultures and histories of Indigenous nations ( Big-Canoe and Richmond, 2018 ; Panelli and Tipa, 2007 ). This approach conceptualizes Indigenous health within the multidimensional relationships that exist between Indigenous people and the Land. These connections represent a reciprocal relationship of ethical and spiritual responsibilities that Indigenous peoples hold with the Land as an animate being, relative and teacher ( Daigle, 2016 ; Styres, 2017 ).
Across diverse environments and ecosystems globally, relationships to Land form the basis of complex knowledge systems that foster holistic wellness ( Biddle and Swee, 2012 ; Wilson, 2003 ). The Land provides the material resources and activities that support physical health ( Parlee and Berkes, 2005 ), while also facilitating emotional and spiritual connections to families, ancestors, future generations and all of creation ( Greenwood and de Leeuw, 2007 ). It is the teacher that supports intergenerational knowledge transfer and makes the space to foster social relationships and belonging for mental health ( Lines and Jardine, 2019 ). By centering the cultural and geographic dimensions of wellness, the Land is recognized as a key determinant of Indigenous identities, nationhood and futures ( Pasternak et al., 2019 ). Beginning from this perspective, Indigenous health geography provides a critical approach to consider how the relationship between health and place in Indigenous communities is impacted by the structure of colonialism and processes of environmental dispossession.
A wide body of literature has emerged around the health impacts of environmental dispossession for Indigenous communities ( Tobias and Richmond, 2014 ; Brown et al., 2012 ; Simpson et al., 2009 ). Environmental dispossession describes direct and indirect processes through which Indigenous peoples' access to their territories is reduced or eliminated ( Richmond and Ross, 2009 ). As dispossession severs the health-sustaining relationship between Indigenous communities and the Land, this literature aims to identify historic and contemporary processes of dispossession and measure the place-based outcomes for wellness. For example, in the First Nations context, Canada's 1876 Indian Act and creation of the reserve system systematically displaced communities from their ancestral territories and contained them on small plots of undesirable land ( Reading, 2018 ; Borrows, 2008 ). By disconnecting communities from the cultural and spiritual resources of the Land ( Tobias and Richmond, 2014 ), and often the material resources of survival ( Bradford et al., 2016 ; Fieldhouse and Thompson, 2012 ), the reserve system has been linked to critical health concerns such as diabetes, substance issues and suicide ( Chandler and Lalonde, 2008 ), as well as to socio-economic disadvantage ( de Leeuw et al., 2012 ; RCAP 1996 ), high rates of missing and murdered women ( National Inquiry MMIWG, 2019 ) and genocide. Indirect dispossession has been equally devastating as Canadian policies have alienated Indigenous peoples from their territories though the residential school system ( TRC, 2015 ), Sixties Scoop, child welfare and resource extraction ( Tobias and Richmond, 2014 ; RCAP, 1996 ).
As Indigenous communities continue to struggle with the impacts of historic and ongoing forms of dispossession, they are searching for strategies to rebuild their connections to Land and promote wellness.
Environmental repossession is a theoretical concept that describes the processes that Indigenous peoples engage in to reclaim their lands and restore healthy ways of living ( Big-Canoe and Richmond, 2014 ). This concept emerged from community-based research with Anishinaabe youth in Biigtigong Nishnaabeg (Pic River First Nation) that explored perceptions of health in the context of social relationships and a changing Anishinaabe way of life. The youth expressed serious concerns about community health in relation to ongoing dispossession and described a need to draw on community relationships to reconnect with Indigenous Knowledge and the Land. Specifically, the youth called for land-based activities with Elders to learn and practice the teachings that sustain Anishinaabe identity and ways of life. Drawing from these results, Big-Canoe and Richmond theorized that land, social relationships and Indigenous Knowledge might be the underlying drivers of environmental repossession efforts ( Big-Canoe and Richmond, 2014 ).
Despite emphasis on active place-based processes, few studies have examined environmental repossession in applied community contexts. Current conceptualizations suggest that repossession is represented in practice by diverse strategies that reflect the histories, cultures and experiences of colonization of communities ( Tobias and Richmond, 2016 ; Big-Canoe and Richmond, 2014 ). For example, Tobias and Richmond (2016) engaged in community-based participatory action research with two Ontario First Nations to examine the potential strategies Elders recommend for their communities. Elders proposed four broad goals for repossession efforts: re-establishing relationships between Elders and youth; increasing time spent on traditional lands; improving physical health; and fostering community pride. Building on this study, Mikraszewicz and Richmond (2019) partnered with Biigtigong Nishnaabeg to document a community canoe trip to reclaim, rename and restore cultural meaning to significant places along the Pic River. Participating youth and knowledge holders indicated that the canoe trip simultaneously created space for the practice of Indigenous Knowledge, strengthening of social relationships and building of connections to Land. As the journey reconnected participants to the Land as an essential part of Biigtigong's history, culture and wellness, it took on the role and meaning of a process of environmental repossession ( Mikraszewicz and Richmond, 2019 ).
Hatala et al. (2019) advanced theoretical understanding of the concept by exploring environmental repossession in the urban context and at the individual level. This research examined how Indigenous youth navigate relationships to Land in the city of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and the perceived importance of these relationships for wellness. Youth linked access to and connections with Land to their sense of identity and described the everyday and personal practices used to remake these connections in the urban environment. The results reconceptualize environmental repossession as a process of land-making or place-making wherein individuals not only reclaim Land or land-based practices, but actively and continually renegotiate their relationships to Land, whether in new environments or through new activities ( Hatala et al., 2019 ).
Building on the theoretical base of literature, the research presented here explores environmental repossession in practice in order to explore how it is applied and measured by Indigenous communities as a means to restoring Anishinaabe lifeways and wellness. To do so, this research documents and examines the case of an individual strategy of repossession implemented by Biigtigong Nishnaabeg at Mountain Lake. By exploring the experiences and perceptions of youth, staff and Elders on the repossession of Mountain Lake, this study focuses on two central questions: 1) How do Indigenous communities develop and enact distinct processes to reclaim territory? And, 2) What do these reclamation processes mean for community members and their connections to land?
This study was conducted in partnership with Biigtigong Nishnaabeg, an Anishinaabe community located on the north shore of Lake Superior, Canada. Since time immemorial, Biigtigong's ancestors have lived and travelled throughout its territory of more than two million hectares, hunting and trapping off its land, fishing and canoeing through its rivers, and building a complex knowledge system related to its land base. This reciprocal relationship between Biigtigong and its territory has been damaged by colonial laws and policies of environmental dispossession. The coastline of Lake Superior is governed by the 1850 Robinson-Superior Treaty, and although Biigtigong never directly signed the agreement nor agreed to its terms (Biigtigong Nishnaabeg, 2018 ), the Treaty has been used to undermine Biigtigong's sovereignty over its unceded territory. The Treaty, alongside the Indian Act, has been used to transfer land to the state, confine the community to a reserve of 332.7 ha (Biigtigong Nishnaabeg, 2018 ) and impose an Indian Agent to control land-based activities. Federal and provincial governments have implemented further forms of dispossession to disconnect Biigtigong members from their Land, such as removing children through residential schools, underfunding community infrastructure and outlawing spiritual practices ( Tobias and Richmond, 2014 ). More recently, government-supported natural resource industries have destroyed or contaminated the physical environments of many significant places throughout the territory.
Mountain Lake lies along the Western boundary of Biigtigong's territory and is a significant place from which the community has been largely disconnected. The area lies approximately 1.5 h' drive outside of Biigtigong's reserve and encompasses a large freshwater lake and sandy beach surrounded by forested mountains. Historically, many Biigtigong families lived and hunted around Mountain Lake and a permanent town was located on nearby Jackfish Lake. Community Elders describe the area as important for food security and physical health as their parents and grandparents would harvest moose, deer and caribou, trap beaver, pick blueberries and medicines, and fish for white fish (interview data). Mountain Lake is also part of the larger waterway system used by Biigtigong members to travel by canoe throughout their territory. These transportation routes were vital for access to traditional foods, spiritual sites and land-based knowledge to uphold spiritual and mental wellness, as well as maintaining kinship relations with neighbouring communities to promote identity and knowledge sharing across the Anishinaabe nation.
Despite the Treaty-created reserve and oppressive colonial policies, many Biigtigong families continued to access the Western boundary of the territory and Mountain Lake until the introduction of registered trap lines by federal and provincial governments in the early 20th century. Originally construed to preserve beaver stocks and prevent over-trapping, the trap line system assigned use of specific areas to individuals registered to an annual trapping license and designated an allowance of animals ( Cummins, 1992 ). Access to trapping in the Mountain Lake area and the ability to sell the trapped fur was allocated to non-Indigenous individuals and other local First Nations, with Biigtigong families dislocated from this place. Disconnection from Mountain Lake has been reinforced by the sale of land to non-Indigenous cottagers by the government, who remains the legal title owner of this land (interview data). As a result, the majority of community members today have never visited Mountain Lake or do not know that it exists. The intergenerational teaching of community history, meaning and knowledge related to this place is under threat of being lost (interview data) with implications for individual and community wellness.

Section: 2. Methods

The research presented here is part of an international study with Indigenous communities in Canada, Hawai'i and Aotearoa to document and explore strategies of environmental repossession . The Biigtigong case is grounded in the long-standing research and personal relationship between Biigtigong Nishnaabeg and the second author, an Anishinaabe scholar and community member. This research draws from Anishinaabe mino-bimaadiziwin (living in a good way) as methodology ( Debassige, 2010 ) and adopts a relational approach, one that emphasizes the interconnected relationships of all living things ( Bell, 2016 ). As a methodological principle, relationality involves not only the researcher and community, but includes relationships with self, the past and future, the environment, Indigenous Knowledge and Spirit ( McGregor, 2018 ; Kovach, 2009 ). Upholding these relationships is a long-term journey that is supported in research by adhering to the seven original Anishinaabe teachings of wisdom, love, respect, bravery, honesty, humility and truth ( Bell, 2016 ). Specifically, living good relationships through the research process involves privileging Indigenous experiences, respecting cultural protocols and the sacredness of Indigenous Knowledge ( Debassige, 2010 ), practicing reciprocity ( Wilson, 2008 ) and accountability ( Kovach, 2009 ), and supporting communities to achieve their own goals of mino-bimaadiziwin ( McGregor, 2018 ). This study developed from the understanding that the needs and knowledges of the community would guide the research process, and also builds from powerful calls for research to uphold Indigenous self-determination ( Smith, 2013 ; Louis, 2007 ).
The first author, a settler graduate student, took the lead in conducting this research phase of the case study . A community-based participatory research (CBPR) approach was employed to ensure community ownership and prioritize Indigenous voices throughout the research process ( Tobias et al., 2013 ; Wallerstein and Duran, 2006 ). In summer 2018, the academic authors travelled to Biigtigong to meet with the community's Band Manager and members of the Band's Department of Sustainable Development. In First Nations communities, the band is the local unit of government established by the Indian Act and governed by an elected chief and council members ( Minister of Justice, 1985 ). Through these meetings, relationships were fostered, and a research team established with one academic and one community researcher leading the study. The community representatives identified the need for research to examine Biigtigong members' relationship to the Western boundary of its territory and Mountain Lake, an area with little ongoing use by the community. Also, that summer, Biigtigong constructed two cabins along the shores of Mountain Lake to encourage community land use at this place. The band's goal for the research was to support renewed connection to Mountain Lake through the collection of community history and knowledge about the area. Building from this goal, the lead author and community researcher worked collaboratively to develop a research process, guided by a ‘two-eyed seeing’ framework that makes space for Western and Indigenous knowledge systems to be used alongside one another ( Martin, 2012 ). The research was approved by the Non-Medical Research Ethics Board of the researchers' home institution and was publicly launched in Biigtigong in October 2019.
In July 2019, Biigtigong's Department of Sustainable Development hosted a week-long camp at Mountain Lake, financially supported through the research project, with the goal to collect history and Indigenous Knowledge related to the place and the community's changing relationship to it. Community Elders and knowledge holders were invited to participate, as well as department staff and summer students. The annual summer student program hires youth enrolled in secondary and post-secondary education to build employment skills while learning about the department and its role in the community. The camp was organized as a daily event between 9:30am-4pm, with participants returning home each evening. The community researcher took the lead in planning the camp activities with the intention of facilitating time and space for Elders and youth to be together and to share local Anishinaabe knowledge. Transportation to the camp was provided for Elders and students, and meals were cooked and shared as a group. The first author worked closely with the community researcher in preparing for the camp and participated in the week-long event. This participation in the planning and preparation were vital for strengthening the relationship with the community researcher and developing rapport and trust with the Elders and broader community. Due to the close-knit and family-oriented nature of Biigtigong, many attendees brought along family members to participate throughout the week. Daily participation fluctuated between 30 and 50 community members.
To explore individual experiences and meanings of the camp and construction of cabins at Mountain Lake, semi-structured, story-based interviews were conducted with participating Elders, students and staff. These methods were determined to be appropriate as they encourage participant control over the conversation and make space for local Indigenous Knowledge and realities ( Rieger et al., 2020 ; Iseke, 2013 ). In the context of research with Indigenous communities, Wilson (2008) and Kovach (2009) have suggested that story-based methods provide a means to privilege each participant's lived experience as knowledge, while situating it within the context of their family, community and culture. A flexible interview guide was co-developed by the research team to encourage conversation through open-ended questions around connections to Land, community and Indigenous Knowledge. Purposeful sampling was used to select interview participants based on their complete attendance at the week-long camp. In total, fifteen interviews were conducted with participating community members, including four Elders/knowledge holders, six students and five staff. Interviews with Elders took place at the Mountain Lake camp, while interviews with staff and students took place the following week in Biigtigong. All interviews were conducted by the first author and audio recorded with permission. Notes and observations were recorded by the first author and community researcher throughout the camp and at debriefing sessions held at the end of each day by the two researchers.
The recorded interviews were transcribed and shared with all members of the research team. Given time and capacity constraints on the community researcher, a collaborative determination was made that the lead author would undertake preliminary analysis of the data using an inductive thematic approach. Thematic analysis involves initial coding of the raw data and organizing of it into thematic categories to understand patterns of meaning across participants ( Clarke et al., 2015 ). This analytical approach enabled the research team to identify, organize and interpret themes across the diverse lived experiences of the three participant groups, Elders/knowledge holders, youth and staff. Using Nvivo software, the first author applied an inductive approach to generate preliminary codes to describe the textural detail and richness of the data ( Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2006 ). As the methodology aimed to privilege Indigenous experiences and knowledge, an inductive approach allowed the participants' voices to directly drive the development of codes prior to any theoretical interpretation by the researcher ( Boyatzis, 1998 ). Inductive coding allows the flexibility required for the analysis of story-based interviews, in which participants may share knowledge and perceptions not easily categorized into the initial theoretical framework, and makes space for unexpected findings. Following the creation of detailed codes, an iterative interpretation process took place in which main themes were: 1) identified; 2) explored across and within the interviews; and 3) situated within Biigtigong's local context. Member-checking with the participants and research team was ongoing throughout this process to promote the reliability and contextual validity of emerging findings.

Section: 3. Results

The results of our analysis are presented around three key findings. As a process of environmental repossession, the construction of the cabins and camp at Mountain Lake aimed to: 1) reclaim access to Mountain Lake; 2) reintroduce the community to this land; and 3) remake community relationships to Land in this place. These findings are discussed in relation to the three groups of participants at Mountain Lake and the different lived experiences they bring to their roles at the camp. To highlight how understandings of the camp and cabins are reflective of these diverse perspectives, participants are identified below through their age and role (e.g. youth, staff or Elder/knowledge holder).
For participating Biigtigong staff, the cabins and camp aimed to reclaim access to Mountain Lake for community members. While Biigtigong's territory remains unceded, the community has been largely disconnected from it by colonial policies of environmental dispossession. One Elder described how Mountain Lake was traditionally a significant place for Biigtigong families to camp, hunt, fish, trap and travel through the area until colonial policies confined the community to their small legal reserve. They used to go hunting , and fishing, and trapping, and everything. I remember my uncles doing that … And some of them were complaining, they're really, viciously, that this is – We want to go back there. Because of the complaints that they were getting from the Zhaganash [white men], so they never came back, they worked out from Pic River . (Elder 1)
Another knowledge holder explained how the community's disconnection from Mountain Lake was linked to the creation of the trap ground system that removed the ability of Biigtigong members to trap and sell fur from the area. Well they came up with trap grounds, I think, it was in the late 60s or early 70s. I'm not sure the exact year. Prior to that our community was all over the place. They moved around. But once they set the trap grounds, then we were stuck to one area. So, then we were moved away from here in that regard, too. (Knowledge holder 3)
In response to generations of dispossession, many staff described the construction of the cabins and hosting of the camp as a demonstration of Biigtigong's ongoing jurisdiction over Mountain Lake and its intention to use this place as it wishes. For instance, a staff member described how for the department and community's political leadership, being back out at Mountain Lake was a process of reclaiming the community's rights to this land. Whether you're hunting, trapping, fishing, those are your rights to go and use the land in the way that it once was and that it was restricted for a period of time. So, it's almost like we're reclaiming our rights… (Staff 3)
Specifically, the construction of the cabins along the shore of Mountain Lake was seen by all staff as a physical marker of Biigtigong's reclamation of this place. The two wooden, four-season structures are available for free use to the community and are intended to encourage camping at the lake. But, as described by a staff member, the cabins are also intended as a visible sign of Biigtigong's self-determination over Mountain Lake that is recognizable to government and non-Indigenous people. Putting up those cabins it tells government or even just people in general that, ‘We're here. We're not going away. We're always gonna be here regardless.’ (Staff 4)
This message of self-determination was immediately noticeable to the non-Indigenous cottagers in the area. As the land was being prepared for the cabins, one knowledge holder and staff member stated that tensions rose between Biigtigong staff and cottagers around the lake. That's the first time the cottagers realized that we were here. And they said to the guys, 'You should've asked us first.' And the guys just told them, 'We don't have to ask anybody.' We just told them, and they walked away mad. (Knowledge holder 3)
Finally, the camp provided an opportunity for staff to teach the community's self-determination over the Land to participating youth. One staff, who works closely with youth, discussed how the camp was a process of teaching the next generation of Biigtigong members about the community's jurisdiction over its territory. It's also important to show the younger generation that, 'This is where your ancestors played. This is where your ancestors roamed. This is where they hunted and fished.' And by doing that, you reclaim your space … I don't ever recall having conversations like this growing up where we had a sense of entitlement to the land. I don't ever recall being told, 'Well, this is your land. You shouldn't give it up so easily' mainly because [the reserve] is everything I knew. (Staff 4)
As this comment reveals, many members' sense of Biigtigong as a community is closely linked to the reserve. The camp at Mountain Lake was intended to show the participating youth that the community's land rights and territory extend far beyond the reserve, and include places which community members have not been able to use in many years.
While reclaiming access is an important part of repossession efforts, a common theme among staff and Elders/knowledge holders was the need to reintroduce Mountain Lake to the broader community. In planning the cabins and camp at Mountain Lake, a primary goal for department staff and band leadership was to encourage land use at this place. All participating staff described the activities at Mountain Lake as a process of bringing Biigtigong back to this place, with the intention that community members would begin actively and regularly using it. One staff member highlighted the role of the cabins and camp in getting the community back on the land at Mountain Lake: "It is introducing the community members to a place that's outside of our, almost our comfort zone or the areas that we know as a community" (Staff 3).
References to Mountain Lake as a place where Biigtigong members do not feel comfortable, safe or welcome were common across all participants. Given the community's ongoing dispossession and disconnection from the area, the majority of participants had never been to Mountain Lake. Many expressed feelings of Mountain Lake as unknown or as belonging to non-Indigenous cottagers. For example, after a tense interaction between cottagers and an Elder on the road leading to the lake, a staff member worried: Is she gonna feel comfortable to go home and tell her daughter and son-in-law to bring the kids down there? Because … If she felt like, 'Oh, my God, I'm doing something wrong out there,' she wouldn't want her children and grandchildren to feel that way. (Staff 2)
By bringing community members to Mountain Lake for the weeklong camp, staff intended to familiarize the community with this place and reintroduce it as accessible, available and “something to not be fearful of” (Staff 3). For instance, one staff stated: It was pretty special to have everybody out there and not only reconnect the Elders with that area but introducing it to the youth again. Going back to that whole idea of you know saying that, ‘This place exists, and you can go out there and you can use it anytime.’ (Staff 2)
Two young staff described a desire to change their own families’ relationships to Mountain Lake which motivated them to bring young family members to the camp. I wanted him [my son] to see that you can come out here and not feel like you're trespassing. And I told him, 'You could come out here anytime, say when you're older and if you have kids or a family, you could bring them out here.' (Staff 5) Reintroducing Mountain Lake through its cultural meaning and community history was described by many Elders as a reason for participating in the camp. Elders/knowledge holders expressed that their role at the camp was to share the history and Indigenous Knowledge situated in Mountain Lake as a way to give this place meaning for the younger participants. By sharing teachings and stories about traditional use of the Mountain Lake area, Elders aimed to reconnect the community to this place through their ancestors. Throughout the week, Elders shared stories of ancestors fishing, harvesting, trapping, blueberry picking, canoeing and camping in the area. Key among these teachings was the story of Mountain Lake's name change and the reintroduction of this place through its traditional name. A knowledge holder explained that many Biigtigong members know of Mountain Lake as Santoy Lake, the name given to this place by settler cartographers. This understanding of Mountain Lake was reflected by many youths, including one who expressed confusion over the existence of the place, stating: "I've only ever heard Santoy. I've never even heard of Mountain Lake before" (Youth 3)
Learning about Biigtigong's history at Mountain Lake changed the youth and young staff members' understandings of this place as Biigtigong's land. Following the camp, many participants described feeling connected to their ancestors in this place and a desire to return to “get back with our land and do what our Elders did back then” (Youth 5). For instance, one young staff member described the love for Mountain Lake that came from knowing the community's ancestors had been there: To realize that that's your territory, right, and just to have that love of it knowing that the spots that these cabins are were chosen for a reason. And they could reconnect and probably like just feel the spirit of their ancestors that are still there with them. (Staff 2)
All participants expressed an intention to return to Mountain Lake and to share this place with their families and broader community.
Indigenous relationships to Land are complex, sacred and upheld through protocols and responsibilities shared through generations. Personal connections to Land are situated within ongoing community relationships and framed by one's ancestors and future generations. As Biigtigong has been disconnected from Mountain Lake for generations, few participants had personal connections to the Land in this area. For the majority of participants, the camp was the first time they had been at Mountain Lake. Some Elders/knowledge holders described family connections or early childhood experiences that established a personal relationship to the area, but all youth and younger staff experienced Mountain Lake as a new place. Through the activities of the camp, they started to build relationships to Mountain Lake by creating new stories and experiences together in this place. As youth worked with Elders and enjoyed the natural environment, many began to refer to these activities as processes of creating new stories about Mountain Lake for the future: I could go out there and make stories for myself and when I'm older, I could tell my grandchildren and the youth in the community what it was like when I was younger. (Youth 4)
As discussed by this youth, the new stories forming at the camp were not only important for the youths’ personal futures, but would be told to their children and future generations. The younger participants were making connections to Mountain Lake that they intended to sustain by sharing their experiences of this place with generations of Biigtigong to come. A young staff member explained how this forward thinking extends for seven generations: It's not only introducing it for our youth, it's again their children and their children and their children. So, it's a small, little almost gesture, but it's gonna have a huge impact on community members for those seven generations. (Staff 3)
The youths' developing personal connections to this land were framed within the community's ongoing history with and relationship to Mountain Lake. A common desire expressed by the youth and younger staff was for these new stories and memories to continue to be shared, and eventually become part of the community's teachings and history as they grew up to be Elders. For instance, one youth described the activities of the camp as an opportunity to “make more stories and, you know, like teachings and memories and stuff. Hopefully those will get carried on through generations,” (Youth 4) relating her experiences at Mountain Lake with the community's teachings of the future.
Although the youth and younger staff were making new personal relationships to Mountain Lake that were different from the relationships their ancestors held with this place, all of the staff felt that the connection to and love for the territory that the youth were learning was the same. One staff member described how her young nephew's new connection to Mountain Lake would foster his broader love for and sense of community in Biigtigong's territory. As long as I continue to do what I can to my ability to foster his ability to go out there into the land, to harvest from the land, to play on the land, to just have that love for it, to go down to the mouth of the Pic, to jump into Lake Superior water, to walk to a tree and just do whatever he wants with his imagination, then when he becomes my age, he's gonna do anything that he can to ensure that his children will have those memories and ability to connect and feel that sense of love and community that he probably feels. (Staff 2)
This staff member explained how renewing members' connections to Mountain Lake is part of the balance that Biigtigong's leadership is working towards in reclaiming its territory in ways that foster a strong and healthy community for the future. There's nothing that we can do within our power to go back to where it was traditionally, but there's finding that balance, learning, relearning. Because we have that ability, we have the stories from there to be able to go back and to see, kind of a peek of, what it was like back then. But we also have to balance the life that we live in now. (Staff 2)
For staff, the camp was not about creating a new relationship between the community and Mountain Lake, but represented a process of restoring or re-making the community's relationship to this land in the context of its current realities and needs.
This paper qualitatively examined how individual processes of environmental repossession are mobilized by Indigenous communities as place-based actions to reclaim and reconnect to Land. Specifically, this research documented the development and implementation of a community camp and cabins to repossess Mountain Lake in Biigtigong Nishnaabeg territory, and explored the community meanings of this process for Biigtigong members. Collaborative thematic analysis suggests three primary findings around the meanings of the camp and cabins as: 1) reclaiming access to Mountain Lake and asserting jurisdiction over this land; 2) reintroducing the community to Mountain Lake and increasing community use of this land; and 3) re-making relationships to Land at Mountain Lake for the community today and future generations.
To begin the process of repossessing Mountain Lake, staff described the need to reclaim community access to this land. For the past 70 years, Biigtigong members have had limited access to Mountain Lake and staff perceived the first step to be creating space in this place for community use. By constructing the cabins along the lake, the department established a safe and visible access point for community members into the area. At the same time, by not notifying cottagers or the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources , the department exercised its Indigenous rights to access this land when and how the community wishes. In so doing, the department asserted its own understanding of Biigtigong's jurisdiction over Mountain Lake as part of its territory.
Following the reclamation of access to Mountain Lake, staff hosted the camp to reintroduce Biigtigong families to this land and encourage them to use the area. Given Biigtigong's disconnection from the Mountain Lake area, many community members do not know that this land is part of their territory, nor that it is available for community use. By hosting a camp with cultural activities, inviting Elders and youth, and providing transportation and meals, staff intended to motivate community turnout and create a social atmosphere that would reframe Mountain Lake as a comfortable and safe place for the community to be together. Elders/knowledge holders expressed that their responsibility in this process was to reintroduce Mountain Lake as Biigtigong's land through its renaming, and the sharing of stories which returned community history and meaning to this place.
For Biigtigong staff and leadership, the final step of repossessing Mountain Lake was to renew the relationship between community members and this land as a means to build love for and a desire to protect it. Framed by dislocation from Mountain Lake and the loss of place-based knowledge, fostering relationships to Land does not mean reviving the specific practices and knowledges of ancestors. Instead, it involves a re-making of Biigtigong's relationship to Mountain Lake in which personal connections are expressed in new ways, although the community meanings and value of these connections remain the same. Youth were aware of their role in re-making community relationships to Land and positioned themselves as the link between Elders and future generations. The youth and young staff spoke of their learnings and memories at Mountain Lake as the stories, teachings and Indigenous Knowledge for future generations. In this way, they experienced the camp as a process of re-making the community's connection to Mountain Lake in relation to their contemporary realities and understandings of Anishinaabe identity.
Taken together, the perceptions of community members demonstrate that Biigtigong applied environmental repossession at Mountain Lake through a multistep strategy to re-make this place as Anishinaabe land and build a foundation for restoring community wellness . The camp and cabins fulfilled multiple roles for Biigtigong as a political and legal process to exercise Indigenous rights to its territory, a social process of fostering community identity and belonging through relationships to Land and each other, and a cultural process of re-making relationships to Land through place-based Indigenous Knowledge and history. Collectively, these roles strengthen community members' physical, mental, emotional and spiritual connections to Mountain Lake and each other, and support individual and community wellness in this place. This mobilization of repossession reflects Big-Canoe and Richmond's (2014) suggestion that reclaiming access to Land is not sufficient for repossession efforts, as physical access must be complemented by processes that give meaning to Land and foster relationships to it. While the cabins were important for reclaiming access to and demonstrating jurisdiction over Mountain Lake, the department staff understood this as only the first step in bringing the community back and transforming its relationship to this place. To feel connected to Mountain Lake, community members needed to be reintroduced to this place as part of Biigtigong's territory and to build personal relationships to it, which in turn was facilitated by the practice of Indigenous Knowledge with Elders and the strength of social relationships between participants.
As a process of re-making Mountain Lake as Anishinaabe land, this case speaks to the recent work of Hatala et al. (2018) to understand environmental repossession as a dynamic practice of land-making, or place-making, outside of reserves or ‘traditional’ Indigenous environments. While Mountain Lake lies within Biigtigong's ancestral territory, the sad reality is that many community members have never been to this place, nor do they see it as a space where they belong. The colonial definition of Indigenous space as the reserve continues to structure Biigtigong's relationship to the Land; it has been enforced and internalized such that the community does not feel comfortable or allowed to access many areas of its territory. The result, as a youth summarized, is that “we all kind of just stay on the res even though that's what the Indian agent was for, to keep us on the res” (Youth, 4). Mountain Lake is a new place for many Biigtigong members; it has been redefined as Santoy Lake, a place for settler cottagers and a space in which Indigenous people do not belong. Biigtigong is not simply returning to Mountain Lake. It is exercising its rights to access this land and actively transforming the community's relationship to it. This new relationship is a re-creation of Mountain Lake as Anishinaabe land and is developing out of the memories, stories and knowledge both in existence and being created at the camp. Repossession as land-making points to the broader goals of land reclamation movements internationally, as they look beyond legal mechanisms to seek Indigenous nationhood , sovereignty and sustainable futures (Pasternak et al., 2018; Goeman, 2013 ; KARI-OCA 2 Declaration, 2012 ).
As Indigenous communities globally search for new ways to reclaim and reconnect to their lands, our results draw attention to the potential tensions of engaging in strategies of environmental repossession. As a process of place-making through direct action, the practice of repossession can be empowering, but also uncomfortable and difficult. While the camp revolved around social and educational activities, it also forced community members to face the ongoing impacts of Biigtigong's experiences with dispossession and colonialism . During the construction of the cabins, staff encountered cottagers who were confrontational, questioned Biigtigong's right to be at Mountain Lake, and reported the ongoing work by Biigtigong to the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. At the same time, activities surrounding the camp often required community members to address feelings of not belonging and fears of trespassing on their own land. In the time that Biigtigong has been disconnected from Mountain Lake, it is clear from the interviews that individuals have internalized feelings of dislocation and not belonging to this place. This is unfortunately not uncommon, as Indigenous communities actively asserting their rights to land must often confront resistance from non-Indigenous peoples and businesses, state institutions, and other Indigenous organizations. For instance, the struggle of Kanaka Maoli (Indigenous Hawaiians) to protect their relative and sacred mountain, Mauna Kea, from the potential Thirty-Metre Telescope has been forced to confront state law enforcement and privileged scientific committees ( Goodyear-Ka 'ōpua, 2017 ). Similarly, the efforts of the Wet'suwet'en nation in British Columbia to protect their lands from pipeline development and other environmentally destructive resource projects has been met with violence, arrests and tactics of control by the provincial government and police ( Diabo, 2020 ). While these confrontations receive community, public and media attention, there has been limited research to explore how Indigenous communities experience, navigate or overcome these tensions of environmental repossession.
Alongside the tensions of repossession, this study raises important methodological considerations for future research around the application and measurement of the concept. Our results demonstrate that community staff, specifically those employed in the Department of Sustainable Development, were the primary drivers of Biigtigong's efforts at Mountain Lake. It was the staff who developed the vision, organized the logistics and addressed any arising tensions. Their voice and role in this work was critically important to document, as it was they who supported the structural foundation and mobilization of this particular repossession effort. The existing literature has focused primarily on the engagement of Elders ( Tobias and Richmond, 2016 ), youth ( Hatala et al., 2019 ) or Elders and youth together ( Mikraszewicz and Richmond, 2019 ) to explore how these two distinct groups understand and experience processes of repossession. By including staff of Biigtigong's Department of Sustainable Development alongside Elders and youth, this research has expanded our understanding of the underlying structural needs necessary to carry out strategies of environmental repossession. Our emphasis on the practical considerations, staffing needs and day-to-day realities of practicing repossession will be helpful for other communities who wish to pursue strategies of their own.

Section: 4. Conclusion

In this paper, we examined the application of an individual strategy of environmental repossession in order to understand how Indigenous communities are reclaiming and reconnecting their relationships to Land. Framed by the approach of Indigenous health geography , our results demonstrate the complexities and tensions of environmental repossession as communities develop transformative processes to remake the lands that uphold their systems of health and wellness. The example of Mountain Lake presented here suggests a potential multi-step strategy to reclaim access to Land, reintroduce Land to the community, and begin remaking community relationships to Land. In shifting environmental repossession from a theoretical construct to applied research, this paper raises important conceptual and methodological considerations around the structures that support the practice of environmental repossession by Indigenous communities. The question for future research is not only how communities apply repossession to address the ongoing structures of colonialism and dispossession, but how they build sustainable structures of repossession to foster self-determination over Land and wellness.
Across Canada and around the globe, Indigenous communities are more connected than ever and seeking to support each other's goals through the sharing of experiences, challenges and successes. Although communities live in very different historical, geographical and cultural contexts, many share the devastating experience of dispossession from their ancestral territories and disconnection from their knowledge systems. As Indigenous communities work to rebuild their livelihoods and identities, many are doing so in new places and on new lands, whether in urban environments, different geographies, or, in the case of Biigtigong, in their own territory. An important opportunity exists for Indigenous and allied scholars to document the stories of Indigenous communities regenerating their land-based practices, skills and knowledge in urban and rural areas, on and off-reserve, and in ancestral and new territories ( Lambert, 2014 ). By sharing these experiences with other Indigenous peoples, communities and nations globally seeking strategies to reclaim their relationships to Land, researchers can directly support Indigenous self-determination over Land, identity and wellness.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to say chi-miigwetch to our research partners, Biigtigong Nishnaabeg and the Department of Sustainable Development. To Florinda Christianson, we could not have completed this work without you and the generous sharing of your time and knowledge. We are also deeply thankful for the support and guidance of the following people: Juanita Starr, Chief Duncan Michano and JoAnne Michano, as well as all of the Elders and youth who shared their time and learning with us at Mountain Lake. We also gratefully acknowledge the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada who funded this research (Insight Grants # 435-2016-0979 ) and who support Elana Nightingale with a Canada Graduate Scholarship.
