Title: The reluctant and the envious: Therapeutic subalternity and the practice of homeopathy in North America


Abstract: Abstract

This work presents a neo-Gramscian theorization of therapeutic hegemony and subalternity, deployed with reference to the practice of homeopathy in North America by two increasingly-professionalized but unorthodox health occupational groups: Homeopaths and Naturopaths. Despite both occupations' contemporary sociopolitical subordination to dominant biomedicine, the continent's Homeopaths have been less successful in their professionalization efforts, owing partly to homeopathy—their primary therapeutic modality—being widely considered incommensurable with biomedical science . For Naturopaths, who increasingly align themselves with biomedical evidentiary norms, homeopathy represents but one among several central therapeutic modalities. Using survey (n = 588) and interview (n = 31) data from an empirical case involving Homeopaths and Naturopaths in Ontario, Canada—a jurisdictional outlier in which both groups are regulated by the state—the author employs the theory of therapeutic subalternity to illuminate the internal struggles faced by homeopathy-practising occupations in a biomedically-dominant context. Despite their regulated standing, Homeopaths' negative media characterization and ongoing lack of access to third-party insurance reimbursement contribute to ongoing frustration among practitioners, expressed as displaced envy toward the province's more elite, homeopathy-practising Naturopaths. However, while most Naturopaths express appreciation for homeopathy's clinical merits, many appear increasingly reluctant to use or discuss the practice to prevent compromise to their profession's therapeutic legitimation.

Section: 1. Introduction

In recent years, sociological studies of therapeutic pluralism in industrialized contexts have examined the professionalization projects of traditional, complementary and alternative medicine (TCAM) practitioner groups ( Gale, 2014 ), also referred to in the literature as ‘heterodox’ therapeutic occupations ( Baer, 2001 ). As Gale (2014) has reviewed, several such studies have engaged neo-Weberian social closure theorizing to investigate TCAM groups' pursuit of greater socio-economic rewards via institutionalized training, exclusionary entry requirements, and statutory regulation. Some scholars (e.g., Welsh et al., 2004 ) have additionally taken up boundary work theory—which draws attention to the ideological demarcation of scientific from non-scientific to unpack the epistemic and evidentiary challenges that TCAM occupations face in relation to biomedicine's socio-political dominance. Elsewhere, Bourdieusian concepts have been used to characterize the intra-occupational tensions and polarities evident within TCAM practitioner groups ( Brosnan, 2017 ). Others have used post-colonial theorizing to critically historicize analyses of traditional medicine occupations in relation to European colonialism and biomedicine's related globalization ( Ijaz et al., 2016 ). Some scholars' studies have brought together multiple approaches under a broader theoretical framework, such as Abbott's system of professions ( Kelner et al., 2006 ) or Larson's concept of the discursive field ( Mizrachi et al., 2005 ). To date, however, no single theoretical model has had the advantage of concurrently accommodating the historical, socio-economic, inter- and intra-occupational, epistemic and evidentiary dynamics at play in TCAM occupational pursuits.
Informed by the theorizing of postcolonial medical historians ( Attewell et al., 2012 ; Hardiman and Mukharji, 2012 ) and medical anthropologists ( Lambert, 2012 ; Baer, 2001 )), the present study proposes adoption of the Gramscian concepts of hegemony and subalternity to construct a comprehensive theoretical framework for interpreting the socio-political positionalities of TCAM occupational groups in global North settings . Then, with reference to the therapeutic practice of homeopathy in North America, and to an empirical study of two homeopathy-practising, regulated health care occupations—Homeopaths and Naturopaths—in Ontario, Canada (undertaken as part of a broader study of Ontario TCAM occupations’ professionalization projects), the present work illustrates how such a neo-Gramscian framework might be fruitfully deployed.

Section: 2. Theoretical framework

Antonio Gramsci originally introduced the concept of the subaltern to characterize the plight of subordinated Italian peasant classes who had little access to statutory power ( Hoare and Smith, 1971 ). Gramsci's theory of subalternity is closely linked to his concept of hegemony , in which “a dominant group's values and ideology become the predominant values throughout society” ( Green, 2002 :6). In Gramsci's conception, hegemonic power is located not only in the state but also in civil society, where dominant cultural discourses acquire the neutralized appearance of “common sense” and are thus sustained as normative by the implicit “consent” of the masses ( Jones, 2006 :51). Subalternity, which “exists in degrees”, refers to the subordinate position of groups which, for various “historical, economic, political, social and cultural” reasons, are not only marginalized within dominant culture but, more specifically, are poorly represented or silenced within hegemonic cultural discourse ( Green, 2002 :10, 8). At times, however, a hegemonic group may sustain its dominance by co-opting “large parts of its subalterns' worldview” ( Jones, 2006 :45) into a culture's dominant discourses.
Postcolonial scholars working in the South Asian context—including medical historians ( Attewell et al., 2012 ; Hardiman and Mukharji, 2012 ) and a medical anhropologist ( Lambert 2012 )—have extended Gramsci's concept of subalternity beyond its class-based focus, to characterize the agentic modes of power engaged by non-elite groups outside of state structures, often with an emphasis on the “coexistence of … plural models of knowledge” in marginalized communities ( Ray and Radhakrishnan, 2010 :41). As Attewell and colleagues ( 2012:3 ) observe with reference to the concept of therapeutic hegemony: “In modern times, only biomedicine is really hegemonic … it projects itself as being scientific, progressive and modern, and it enjoys strong state backing almost everywhere. In this sense, all other [therapeutic] systems are non-hegemonic.” This does not however mean that all non-biomedical approaches in all settings are equally non-hegemonic, or necessarily subaltern; additional theoretical nuance is needed to explore this dimensionality.
With respect to the Indian medical context, subalternist scholars Hardiman and Mukharji ( 2012:7-8 ) describe a “tripartite schema” involving a “plural but hierarchic medical establishment”. At “the top” is “the globalised form of biomedicine” and its concomitant occupations, followed by “a layer of legitimate and state-backed medical practice” comprised of non-biomedical occupations “known by the acronym AYUSH” ( 7-8 ): A yurveda, Y oga/Naturopathy, U nani-Tibb, S iddha and Sowa Rigpa, and H omeopathy. As Lambert (2012) observes, AYUSH occupations are understood in this conceptual model as subordinate to biomedicine, but also as ‘elite’ in that they occupy a privileged position within state structures. The wide range of therapeutic approaches that fall “outside these two hierarchic levels of legitimate medicine” ( Hardiman and Mukharji, 2012 :8) are in turn conceptualized as subaltern. “From a statist perspective,” explain Hardiman and Mukharji ( 2012:15 ), the “chief significance” of subaltern therapeutics “is that they provide an impediment to medical progress. They are thus viewed in a primarily negative way.” Despite their lack of statutory standing, however, subaltern actors may threaten to destabilize the power of therapeutic elites by actively rejecting hegemonic, absolutist claims over health-related knowledge and practice ( Lambert, 2012 ).
As Attewell and colleagues have observed with reference to global South contexts: “beyond the West, there are alternative [non-biomedical therapeutic] systems that claim a civilizational hegemony” today ( Attewell et al., 2012 :3). In Southern Asia, this is evident not only in India but also in Pakistan and Bangladesh, where government bodies sanctioning particular traditional medicine systems are “comparable to the department of AYUSH in India” ( Hardiman and Mukharji, 2012 :7). Across global North settings, however, biomedicine is the predominant form of health care sanctioned by the state, with local Indigenous therapeutic systems being almost universally unregulated, and other TCAM approaches being diversely regulated and unregulated across jurisdictions ( Ijaz et al., 2021 , Ijaz and Boon, 2018 ). In Canada and the US, the TCAM occupations most commonly subject to statutory regulation (at the provincial or state level) are chiropractic , massage therapy , acupuncture and naturopathy. With minor exceptions in both countries, regulated TCAM care is not generally reimbursed by the state but paid out of pocket by the consumer and, in some cases, reimbursed by third-party health insurance companies ( Baer, 2001 ). As Hardiman and Mukharji observe ( 2012:27 ), “different form [s]” of “an elite-subaltern divide” may be evident across location and time. How then might one engage the concepts of therapeutic hegemony and subalternity in contemporary North America?
With reference to the contextual, political and historical distinctions evident across global regions, Spivak (1990 :142) indicates: “If one were to appropriate the notion of the subaltern to an American context, one must pay more attention to Gramsci and not focus on the work going on in India.” While I am unaware of a theory of subalternity being applied within global North studies of medical pluralism, Baer (2001) —a critical medical anthropologist—has proposed an analytic framework that emphasizes Gramsci's concept of hegemony and whose general parameters echo the related subalternist scholarship undertaken in the Indian context.
Baer situates biomedicine (in the North American context) as a therapeutic hegemony in which medical doctors occupy the top tier in a hierarchy that includes such professionals as “nurses, physical and occupational therapists” ( 2001:41 ). Baer furthermore differentiates “a wide array of alternative healing systems” ( 2001:ix ) into subordinated sub-tiers in his model. These include “professionalized heterodox medical systems” (e.g., chiropractic , naturopathy), “partially-professionalized or lay heterodox medical systems” (e.g., homeopaths, herbalists), and unprofessionalized folk and religious healers ( Baer, 2001:6-7 ). Further underpinning Baer's analysis ( 2001:45 ) is a Gramscian conception of professionalization as a “subtle but highly effective hegemonic process by which alternative practitioners internalize some, if not many, of the philosophical premises, therapeutic approaches, and organizational structures of biomedicine”.
While Baer's scholarship does not directly engage therapeutic subalternity as a theoretical construct, his work makes possible some suggestion as to how the concept might be deployed in a North American setting. In contrast to the South Asian context, where statutory recognition may sufficiently demarcate between medical elites and subaltern therapeutic occupations, Baer's work (which differentiates between ‘degrees’ of adherence to hegemonic professionalization discourses) suggests additional consideration of two key factors which, as outlined below, align closely with Gramsci's theorizing.
First, in Gramsci's conception, hegemony is sustained not only in the statutory context but also in the realm of civil society. As such, it not only the state's recognition-via-regulation of a particular occupation that determines that group's elite status, but also the group's own successful adherence to hegemonic professionalization norms. As Baer's work suggests, key civic markers of such adherence might include, in the North American context, institutionalized educational accreditation as well “private insurance” reimbursement ( Baer, 2001 : 93,77). Another civil society determinant of elite stature might involve a group's capacity to see itself favourably represented in “mass media” accounts ( Baer, 2001 :77).
The second Gramscian theoretical point implied in Baer's work is that subalternity is best viewed as a multifactorial ‘spectrum’ ( Green, 2002 ). Consistent with postcolonial studies of subaltern therapeutics, Baer's analysis (2001:31) is intersectional and historicized: situating particular TCAM occupations within the context of “class, racial, ethnic, and gender divisions in the larger society”. In addition to recognizing how TCAM occupations may be internally-differentiated into competing “faction [s]”, Baer's hierarchical occupational framework emphasizes how some heterodox groups' pursuits of elite stature (i.e., their ‘professionalization projects’) will be more successful than others', whether at the state level or in civil society ( Baer, 2001 :70).
Within the overarching theoretical parameters outlined above, additional insights from subalternist scholars provide theoretical nuance that may be applicable beyond South Asia. As Hardiman and Mukharji note ( 2012:23 ), subaltern health care practices may “operate within perfectly secular domains of action, [but] they are often seen by those in power to be informed by irrational religions”. Further, while such practices typically fall outside of biomedicine's hegemonic boundaries—and follow their own, non-biomedical epistemologies—subaltern therapeutic practitioners may embed biomedical concepts within their healing corpuses, at times in a refashioned form ( Hardiman and Mukharji, 2012 ). The latter concept, I suggest, is similar to what Ning (2018 :250)—writing about immigrant Chinese medicine practitioners in Canada—terms epistemic hybridity, wherein distinct epistemic modes may concurrently “coexist within a [single] knowledge-making culture”. Epistemic hybridization with biomedical knowledge may be understood as one mechanism whereby subaltern therapeutic groups may seek to transform, in Gramscian terms, “the relations of subordination that cause their marginalization” ( Green, 2002 :20).
However, in adopting—in whatever degree—hegemonic discourses (epistemic or otherwise), subaltern groups also risk implicitly “consent [ing] to their own subordinate position and to the authority of the ruling groups” ( Green, 2002 :6–7). In addition to potentially reinforcing hegemonic power, this strategy has the potential to produce what Brosnan and Cribb (2019) , working outside of Gramscian parameters, term epistemic stress, characterizing the challenges faced by subordinated occupational groups that negotiate multiple epistemologies within dominant cultural institutions. Epistemic stress may be especially “intensified” when one of the epistemic frameworks at play (e.g., biomedical science) is associated with greater sociocultural “legitimacy” and “high-status forms of expertise” ( Brosnan and Cribb, 2019 :320): in other words, with hegemonic discourse. This work engages the concept of epistemic stress to support theoretical characterizations of therapeutic subalternity.
The current work aims to provide an illustrative application of the presented theory of therapeutic subalternity, and to demonstrate the theory's scope in concurrently engaging with a wide range of contextual considerations. This is achieved with reference to the practice of homeopathy in North America by two different occupational groups: Homeopaths and Naturopaths. As will be shown, the practice of homeopathy is a therapeutic approach that may be understood as subaltern in the North American context today. However, homeopathic practice plays a different role within the two occupational groups under study; and, these groups are differentially aligned with hegemonic biomedical science and dominant professionalization discourses. The nuances and tensions associated with these distinctions become further evident with reference to an empirical case in the Canadian province of Ontario, where Homeopaths and Naturopaths are similarly licensed under the same governing legislation. I begin illustrating how the theory of therapeutic subalternity may be applied, and provide context for the empirical case, by providing a broad historical overview of the practice of homeopathy, and by situating Homeopathy and Naturopathy as North American occupations in the current day. I then turn to the study methods.

Section: 3. Of homeopathy, Homeopaths and Naturopaths

Homeopathy, rooted in the work of German physician Samuel Hahnemann (1755–1843) ( Coulter, 1973 ) is a therapeutic system which emphasizes the principle of ‘like curing like’, the concept of an individualized ‘constitutional’ prescription, and the use of remedies prepared by ‘infinitesimally’ diluting particular substances to the point where no material trace of the original substance remains. The classically-trained homeopath treating a person with insomnia will, for example, differentiate between multiple possible remedies to select one which best ‘matches’ that patient's comprehensive symptom picture (e.g., homeopathically-prepared coffee vs. other substances which—in their undiluted form—might produce sleeplessness). In addition to the individualized ‘classical’ approach, other homeopathic strategies have emerged since Hahnemann's time. These include the use of combination remedies (in which several common homeopathic remedies for a specific condition are combined into a single remedy), and isopathy, conceptually “somewhat akin to conventional vaccination”, in which a homeopathic remedy is made from the “actual cause of the illness, or from its byproducts” ( Jacobs, 2018 :159). Today, homeopathy is variously practised across all continents by lay persons, specialist homeopathic practitioners, and by members of other health care occupations including some naturopaths and biomedical physicians ( World Health Organization, 2013 ).
Very few jurisdictions across the globe statutorily regulate the work of specialist occupational Homeopaths ( Wiesener et al., 2012 ). India is a notable exception, wherein Homeopaths enjoy elite standing as part of the country's AYUSH governance regime ( Hardiman and Mukharji, 2012 ). There, “almost a quarter of a million” Indian homeopathic practitioners were registered by the state in 2007, “more than any other country in the world” ( Prasad, 2007:1679 ), following at least 5.5 years of post-secondary training ( Ghosh, 2010 ). In 2010, there were 178 homeopathic training institutions, 300 homeopathic hospitals and over 8000 homeopathic dispensaries across the country, with 12,000 new homeopathic practitioners entering the profession each year ( Prasad, 2007 ). In North America, however, homeopathy is today a substantially subaltern occupational practice – as evidenced both in the statutory and civic sphere.
North America's homeopathic practitioners have little access to statutory power: one key marker of subalternity. Just three of fifty US states—Arizona, Connecticut and Nevada—have licensure regimes governing homeopathic practice, in each case authorizing Medical Doctors (MDs) with relevant training ( Kasprak, 2010 ). In Arizona and Nevada, non-physician ‘Homeopathic Assistants’ may also legally practice under an MD-homeopath's supervision. While such laws signal homeopathy's partial legitimation by the state, they concurrently co-opt homeopathy under MDs' hegemonic authority, designating them as gatekeepers over the practice, even where ‘Homeopathic Assistants’ are also legitimized. In Canada, the only province to regulate homeopathy—Ontario—has, since 2015, governed non-MD Homeopaths under the same umbrella legislation—the Regulated Health Professionals Act—that licenses MDs and two dozen other health care professions ( Ijaz, 2020 ). Despite this statutory recognition, however, Ontario's Homeopaths—like their unlicensed colleagues across the continent—contend with a range of civic factors which sustain their subaltern positionality.
Aside from homeopathy being almost entirely un-reimbursed under the continent's private (and public) health insurance plans, the most notable factor in this regard is a widespread characterization, by MDs and biomedical scientists, of homeopathy's epistemic premises (and its remedies' ostensible effects beyond placebo) as incommensurate with hegemonic biomedical science ( Ernst, 2012 , Science-Based, 2021 ). This view in turn impacts homeopathy's representation in mass media accounts, another important civic locus where homeopathy's subalternity is reinforced. For example, Canada's national public broadcaster, consenting to the reproduction of hegemonic biomedical science's cultural authority and explicitly silencing homeopathic perspectives, recently announced that it would not represent “a range of views” in its reporting on homeopathy ( Enkin, 2018 :1): Reporters have a responsibility to avoid giving weight to ideas that are generally held to be untrue, or unproven. There is a strong consensus in the medical and scientific community that the claims of homeopathy, and its basic assumptions, have not passed the scrutiny of rigorous science.
Even in Ontario, where non-MD Homeopaths uniquely enjoy statutory recognition for their work, the objections of biomedical ‘experts’ threaten the profession's continued advancement. In 2018, plans to open a homeopathic training program at a public post-secondary college were withdrawn after vocal criticism from “doctors and scientists across the country” ( Crowe, 2018 :1).
Efforts to align the homeopathic occupation with hegemonic professionalization discourse, exemplified in the work of the North American Society of Homeopaths (NASH), continue to fall short. Founded in 1990, NASH is the continent's most prominent voluntary association of homeopathic practitioners ( NASH, 2020 ). NASH has to date accredited twelve North American homeopathic schools (three in Canada, nine in the US), using a ‘big tent’ approach that includes relatively short (500-hour) trainings as well as multi-year programs, lasting thousands of hours and emphasizing biomedical subjects. Such an ‘inclusive’ approach is at odds with hegemonic professionalization discourses, which demand more rigorous exclusivity in educational standards ( Baer, 2001 ). Regardless, NASH's efforts to summon a robust homeopathic profession have yielded little success, with just 23 Canadian and 163 US homeopaths listed on its voluntary practitioner register in early 2022.
But it was not always so; as Lambert ( 2012:122 ) observes, particular therapeutic approaches may “migrate from elite to subaltern practice over time”. Between the mid-1820s when homeopathy first arrived in North America ( Coulter, 1973 ) and a century later when the homeopathic occupation was all but decimated on the continent ( Ullman, 1991 ), homeopathy gained prominence as “the most influential heterodox medical system in the United States” ( Baer, 2001 :12). By 1900, there were more than twenty homeopathic medical schools, over one hundred homeopathic hospitals, and over one thousand homeopathic pharmacies across the US ( Ullman, 1991 ). However, following the 1910 Flexner Report , which precipitated massive reforms in medical education across North America, many homeopathic institutions closed: in 1923, just two homeopathic medical schools remained, and, by 1950, none ( Ullman, 1991 ). A minor homeopathic resurgence would take place in the 1970s, but homeopathy would not regain its prior occupational stature. Nevertheless, one occupational group that played a central role in North American homeopathy's “late 20th century persistence” following its post-Flexner decline would be the continent's Naturopaths ( Nelson et al., 2019 :8).
The naturopathic occupation has origins in late nineteenth century Germany, where proponents popularized a drugless ‘nature-cure’ emphasizing the prevention of disease and activation of “the body's self-healing capacity” through healthy diet and lifestyle, as well as physical and manual therapies (including massage and hydrotherapy) ( Nair and Nanda, 2014 :145). Around the turn of the century, the term ‘naturopathy’—along with the aforementioned practices—began to gain popularity in North America ( Cayleff, 2016 ). Like their homeopathic counterparts ( Coulter, 1973 ), early North American naturopathic leaders sought to distinguish their epistemology and practices from the orthodox therapeutics of their time ( Cayleff, 2016 ). Unlike Homeopaths, whose therapeutic emphasis remained singularly on the application of homeopathic remedies ( Coulter, 1973 ), North America's early Naturopaths embraced an “ever-expanding” list of therapeutic approaches, which became “a source of diffused identity and internal combativeness” ( Cayleff, 2016:39 ). While homeopathy was among the therapeutic approaches practised by some of North America's early Naturopaths, the practice gained in prominence after the 1945 death of naturopathic leader Benedict Lust ( Cayleff, 2016 , Nelson et al., 2019 ).
In 1901, when homeopathy was in its North American heyday, soon to be institutionally decimated, Lust opened the continent's first naturopathic medical institution; and, the naturopathic occupation, spared the Flexner Report's direct impacts, grew over the next decades even as Homeopaths languished. Naturopaths struggled for recognition via licensure, currently achieved in 25 of 50 US states ( American Association of Naturopathic Physicians, 2021 ) and six of Canada's ten provinces ( Canadian Association of Naturopathic Doctors, 2016 ). Today, naturopathic medical education across the profession's seven, internally-accredited educational institutions consists of standardized, four-year, full-time programs with a strong emphasis on the biomedical sciences ( Cayleff, 2016 ). Reflecting their close adherence with hegemonic professionalization discourse, North American Naturopaths enjoy considerably more elite standing than do Homeopaths, with many third-party insurance companies reimbursing naturopathic care. Nevertheless, naturopathy remains an epistemically-hybrid occupation, in which homeopathic epistemology persists alongside biomedical science.
Since the 1950s, when continent's primary naturopathic educational institution first installed a homeopathic course within its core curriculum ( Cayleff, 2016 ), homeopathy's position as a central naturopathic therapy has become more institutionally entrenched. By the mid-1980s, 140 h of homeopathy training would become mandatory across North America's naturopathic schools; this requirement today remains alongside a homeopathic segment on the continent's standardized naturopathic board examination ( Nelson et al., 2019 ). However, the naturopathic occupation has in recent decades aligned itself more strongly with biomedicine's ‘evidence-based’ approach ( Jagtenberg et al., 2006 ). Further, not all North American Naturopaths favour homeopathy's continued inclusion in their profession's institutional curricula, with some characterizing the practice as a “hypothesis-driven fringe form of alternative medicine” plagued by “dogmatism” and “intellectual absurdities” ( Nelson et al., 2019 , 1–2, 7).
Despite their elite standing overall, the continent's Naturopaths remain subordinate to hegemonic biomedicine; and, suffer a share of negative media attention which often draws attention to (subaltern) homeopathy's inclusion within naturopathy's scope, causing strain within the profession. In a 2018 episode which garnered international news coverage, a Canadian Naturopath reported on an online blog that she had successfully used homeopathy to treat a boy with severe aggression ( Lindsay, 2018b ). Following a classical homeopathic approach, the Naturopath had matched the remedy (a dilution of saliva from a rabid dog) to the boy's (‘growling’) condition: a therapeutic approach viewed by the province's Health Minister and others (with reference to hegemonic biomedical science) as problematic if not absurd. After the Naturopath's own (naturopathic) professional association recommended an inquiry, the Naturopath voluntarily relinquished her naturopathic license ( Lindsay, 2018a ), releasing her occupation from the epistemic stress associated with defending homeopathic practice while seeking to characterize itself as aligned with hegemonic science.
In the province of Ontario, Canada, the site of the present study's empirical case, both Homeopaths and Naturopaths have, since 2015, been governed under the province's Regulated Health Professions Act (RHPA). Ontario's Naturopaths had, since 1925, been regulated under the province's Drugless Practitioners' Act ( Welsh et al., 2004 ); as such, regulation under the RHPA brought with it primarily administrative changes, along with a statutory re-affirmation of the profession's legal ‘doctor’ title. Echoing their subaltern positionality elsewhere on the continent, Ontario Homeopaths were until 2015 statutorily unregulated, but hoped that regulation (under which they were not granted a doctor title) would bring greater legitimacy to their work and improve their economic standing ( Ijaz, 2020 , Ijaz et al., 2015 ). However, three years following both occupations' regulation under the RHPA, their differential positionalities remained reflected in practitioners' self-reported annual mean incomes (Homeopaths, $29,230; Naturopaths, $63,834), with over half of Ontario's full-time licensed Homeopaths reporting an annual income below the provincial household poverty line ( Ijaz et al., 2021 ). Recognizing the two occupations' differential positionalities, the empirical casesought to investigate how each group negotiated its relationship to homeopathy—a subaltern therapeutic approach--with reference to hegemonic discourse on a range of fronts. While limited to a single jurisdiction, this case is meant to illuminate more broadly the factors and forces impacting the professionalization trajectories of both occupations in their broader North American contexts.

Section: 4. Methods

This study employs the presented theory of therapeutic subalternity to critically interpret a homeopathy-focused subset of data derived from interviews and online surveys conducted with licensed Homeopaths and Naturopaths in the province of Ontario, Canada over the period 2018–19. The University of Toronto's Research Ethics Board approved the conduct of these interviews and surveys, which formed part of a larger study investigating the professionalization processes of Ontario TCAM practitioners.
The author conducted a total of thirty-one semi-structured interviews with rank-and-file licensed Ontario Homeopaths (n = 14) and Naturopaths (n = 17) over the period 2017–19. To gather a wide range of perspectives about each group's professionalization trajectory, email-based recruitment of interviewees from both occupational groups aimed to reach a broad cross-section of licensed Ontario Homeopaths and Naturopaths in active clinical practice. Of the fourteen interviewed Homeopaths (ten women, four men), eleven had been in homeopathic practice for over ten years (the remainder for less); four were also homeopathic institutional educators. Of the seventeen naturopathic interviewees, (thirteen female, five male), thirteen had been in clinical practice for over ten years and four were also naturopathic institutional educators. Unsuccessful efforts were made to recruit additional interviewees from both occupations with fewer years of practice experience; despite the study team's long-standing relationships with both occupations, some newer practitioners expressed hesitation to speak with an academic researcher for fear their narratives might be deployed to harm their occupation.
Each interview—guided by a semi-structured, occupationally-specific interview guide—lasted 60–90 min and was audio-recorded and subsequently transcribed for inductive thematic analysis ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ), with emergent thematic findings interpreted with reference to the study's identified theoretical framework. Both interview guides inquired in detail as to the respondent's views about the range of factors supporting or impeding their own and their occupation's professional success; and, for Homeopaths, the present work incorporates responses to all interview questions posed. For Naturopaths, this work exclusively interprets responses to a single question posed about homeopathy's role in naturopathic medicine.
Undertaken in the mode of a census, the surveys were launched using the Qualtrics online platform for eight-week periods in late 2018 (Homeopaths) and early 2019 (Naturopaths) respectively. The surveys inquired as to the demographic and practice characteristics of Ontario's licensed Homeopaths and Naturopaths, as well as their views about their professionalization trajectories. Workforce-focused results from these surveys have been elsewhere reported (Anonymized). Design of the surveys was informed both by prior related surveys conducted by the larger study team (Anonymized), and by preliminary analyses of the study interviews, the conduct of which preceded survey launches for each occupational group, respectively.
Sample identification involved an online search strategy aimed at identifying email (or alternately, street) addresses for all currently- or previously-licensed Ontario Homeopaths and Naturopaths, as listed on their respective public online registers. This produced a recruitment sample of 538 Homeopaths and 1518 Naturopaths. All prospective respondents received invitations and reminders by email (at launch; and, at weeks one, three and five); or, where no email address was available, by lettermail (just prior to, and two weeks following launch). All were advised that anonymous, voluntary participation would be constituted as informed consent . The response rate for Homeopaths was 27.7% (n = 183), and 24.1% for Naturopaths (n = 366); while the respondent pool for Naturopaths (77.1% female) closely echoed the profession's documented profile, women (78.3%) were slightly over-represented among surveyed Homeopaths (Anonymized).
Using descriptive statistics, this work reports on a series of Likert-scaled survey items relevant to the present study aims. These include—for both Homeopaths and Naturopaths—respondents’ self-reported frequencies (often, sometimes, rarely, never) regarding their clinical use of single and combination homeopathic remedies, and classical homeopathic constitutional assessment. For surveyed Homeopaths only, the work also presents responses to a series of scaled items (agree, neutral, disagree) interrogating the impacts of the recent regulations governing their profession; and, for surveyed Naturopaths only, their degree of endorsement (agree, neutral, disagree) of the statement, “Homeopathy has no place in naturopathic medicine”.
The Results section that follows interweaves findings from both surveys, first with reference to interviews with Homeopaths, and then with Naturopaths, to produce a theorized interpretive account that illustrates the utility of the concepts of therapeutic hegemony and subalternity in a North American case.

Section: 5. Results

As shown in Table 1 , the practice of homeopathy plays a different role in Ontario's Homeopathy and Naturopathy professions. Over ninety percent of Homeopaths—but just one-third of Naturopaths—use homeopathic remedies ‘often’ in clinical practice. As such, the subalternity of homeopathic epistemology and practice, evident across the continent, may be understood to differentially impact the two occupations as discussed in the sections that follow. Overall, despite intra-occupational support for regulation, Homeopaths continue to struggle with considerable epistemic marginality (expressed as low credibility in the civic sphere) as well as economic challenges which reinforce their subaltern standing. These factors produce considerable frustration among Homeopaths, often articulated as displaced envy toward the province's more elite, homeopathy-practising Naturopaths. Yet, while most Ontario Naturopaths express appreciation for homeopathy's clinical merits, the practice's incommensurability with hegemonic biomedical science looms large in the form of epistemic stress, as many Naturopaths express reluctance to use or discuss the practice. Table 1 . Homeopathy-related practice patterns among Ontario Homeopaths and Naturopaths. Empty Cell Often Sometimes Rarely Never Use any form of homeopathic remedy in clinical practice Homeopaths (n = 136) 92.6% 7.4% 0 0 Naturopaths (n = 297) 32.1% 23.6% 24.3% 19.9% Use classical homeopathic constitutional assessment to make clinical decisions Homeopaths (n = 138) 89.9% 8.7% 1.5% 0 Naturopaths (n = 297) 14.1% 15.5% 26.6% 43.8% Use single homeopathic remedies in clinical practice Homeopaths (n = 136) 91.2% 8.8% 0 0 Naturopaths (n = 297) 22.6% 21.6% 31.3% 24.6% Use combination homeopathic remedies in clinical practice Homeopaths (n = 130) 11.5% 15.4% 36.9% 36.2% Naturopaths (n = 296) 22.0% 23.7% 25.3% 29.0%
Most surveyed Homeopaths (79.0%, Table 2 ) supported regulation in principle, and over two-thirds believed that regulation had improved their occupation's public credibility, suggesting a partial diminishing of their subaltern status. As one interviewed Homeopath explained: In some ways [regulation] helped to make [homeopathy] more mainstream – now when I tell people that I'm a Homeopath, some of them even know how to pronounce that, whereas years ago they had no idea what it was. H6 Table 2 . Homeopathy-related views of Ontario Homeopaths and Naturopaths. Empty Cell Agree Neutral Disagree Homeopaths It was a good idea to regulate homeopathy in Ontario (n = 143) 79.0% 11.9% 9.1% Regulation has had a positive impact on the Ontario homeopathy profession as a whole (n = 139) 70.5% 13.0% 16.5% Regulation has improved the homeopathy profession's credibility with the general public (n = 141) 68.8% 15.6% 15.6% Regulation has improved the homeopathy profession's credibility with other health care professionals (n = 141) 49.6% 23.4% 27.0% Regulation has increased the number of patients seeking homeopathic care in Ontario (n = 132) 26.5% 42.4% 31.0% Regulation has improved the availability of extended (private) insurance benefits for homeopathy (n = 134). 29.9% 20.1% 50.0% Regulation has had positive financial impacts on my work as a homeopath (n = 124) 25.8% 29.8% 44.4% When members of other regulated professions use homeopathy, I lose patients (n = 136) 43.4% 30.9% 25.7% Naturopaths Homeopathy has no place in naturopathic medicine (n = 313) 22.1% 15.6% 62.3%
Others disagreed, alluding to the range of civic factors—such as public skepticism as to their work's epistemic basis, reinforced in mass media accounts-- that continued, in spite of regulation, to impede their occupation's sociopolitical advancement: Homeopaths don't have much support, with all the skepticism and media, we are not supported in the same way as other regulated practices. … I don't see a big difference in public awareness since we have been regulated. Maybe a little, but it's not significant. H5
Further, just half (49.6%) believed that statutory regulation had improved their occupation's standing with other health care professionals ( Table 2 ). Even fewer (26.5%) indicated that their patient loads had increased following regulation, and just one quarter (25.8%) of surveyed Homeopaths characterized statutory regulation as economically advantageous. Evidently, statutory regulation—which many Homeopaths had hoped would be a panacea to cure their occupational subalternity—had to date been an insufficient condition in this regard. Interviewed Homeopaths repeatedly characterized their work's exclusion from third-party insurance plans—a civic construct—as a primary, economic factor in this regard: I can't say that I have a single patient who has told me that their insurance company now covers homeopathic care and didn't before [regulation] … I know no homeopaths who are solely and exclusively homeopathic practitioners who make a living off of what they do. We could never survive on this. H7 The insurance companies are not on board … So I'm a little frustrated with regulation right now. The benefits of regulation have not materialized. H8 I have patients who booked appointments with me and then last minute they realize their insurance is not covering homeopathy. They cancel the appointment … There's no consistency in income here. H12
Fewer than one-third of surveyed Homeopaths indicated that regulation had improved availability of private insurance benefits; and, those who did, still recognized the scarcity of such benefits: I haven't seen any more coverage in my patients, but my wife's plan has [started to include homeopathic coverage]. You have to buy the medical plan, but yeah, seven hundred dollars in homeopathic services. H2
Several Homeopaths drew attention the inequity in insurance companies' coverage of the province's homeopathy-practising occupations. Ontario's Naturopaths, they bemoaned, “have the same legal status” as Homeopaths (H8), but have considerably more access to third-party insurance for their services--including homeopathic care--than do Homeopaths: I take great exception to the fact that the insurance companies, for the most part, will acknowledge naturopathy and they will not acknowledge homeopathy. So we lose patients all the time. They say, my insurance will cover Naturopaths and they do homeopathy — so I'm going to go see a Naturopath. It's not an equal playing field and I find that very frustrating. H9
Among surveyed Homeopaths, a similar sentiment was evident, with 43.4% believing that the use of homeopathy by other regulated professionals caused them to lose patients; Naturopaths are the only other Ontario professionals whose scope includes homeopathy in any substantial capacity. In fact, in several study interviews, Homeopaths expressed overt antipathy towards Naturopaths, whom several Homeopaths characterized not only as “competition” (H1) but as imperiling their own professional success and occupational integrity: The biggest threat to homeopathy for me is not the medical profession and it's not the differences within the homeopathic community. It's the Naturopaths. H9
Homeopaths' rancor toward Naturopaths took multiple forms: often expressed as envy regarding the latter occupation's greater access to insurance reimbursement , but at times mixed in with other grievances. Several Homeopaths specifically lamented that Naturopaths benefited from third-party insurance while ostensibly practising a ‘lesser’ form of homeopathy—to patients' alleged detriment—owing to Naturopaths' more limited homeopathic training: [Naturopaths'] training in homeopathy is far less intensive than ours and yet homeopathic treatment is covered by insurance companies everywhere when given by a Naturopath. I have had to fix more cases than I can count of poorly prescribed homeopathic remedies from Naturopaths. We are the experts in homeopathic medicine, and yet we are treated like second class citizens who know nothing. So there's a bit of a sore spot. H8
Interviewed Homeopaths' repeatedly directed frustration about their epistemic marginality towards Naturopaths who—in several Homeopaths' accounts—do not practise homeopathy ‘correctly’: People are coming to me and saying, ‘I’ve had homeopathic treatment’ – and in fact they’ve seen Naturopaths who are doing homeopathy and, they would open this bag of remedies and combination remedies. They were taking thirty, forty and fifty different remedies at the same time … and I’m thinking, oh my lord! What a mess this is! This is not homeopathy. H7 Many Naturopaths’ absolute refusal to recognize the integrity of homeopathy, it makes me want to pull my hair out. H9
In the preceding excerpts, interviewed Homeopaths deplore Naturopaths' apparent clinical use of ‘combination’ homeopathic remedies, an approach they characterize as being at odds with classical homeopathic practice. As one Homeopath explains: In classical homeopathy, you can only prescribe one remedy at a time. But sometimes, you walk into the health food store and there's a remedy for headaches , and there's ten or twelve [homeopathic] remedies in combination. Most Homeopaths don't use those because we know they're ineffective. H2
It is clear that Ontario's Homeopaths, whose work is fundamentally at odds with hegemonic biomedical science, are members of an epistemically-marginalized occupational group whose work is weakly validated in the civic sphere. However, Homeopaths' rebukes of homeopathy-practising Naturopaths are arguably displaced. As Table 1 shows, just 36.2% of Ontario Homeopaths, as compared to 29.0% of Naturopaths, report ‘never’ using combination homeopathic remedies in clinical practice. In other words, most Homeopaths, like most Naturopaths, use combination remedies at times, suggesting that Homeopaths' grievances in this regard may be masking other concerns. This is not to say that the two occupations do not practice homeopathy differently. Indeed, Homeopaths report using homeopathic constitutional assessment—a classical Hahnemannian diagnostic approach—far more ‘often’ than do Naturopaths ( Table 1 ). Further, while over 90% of Homeopaths use single homeopaths often, Naturopaths report using combination remedies about as often as they do single remedies. In other words, while Ontario Homeopaths appear to practice homeopathy in closer alignment with a classical Hahnemannian approach than do Ontario Naturopaths, the homeopathic practice patterns of both Ontario Homeopaths and Naturopaths represent a hybrid of classical and more contemporary (i.e., combination) approaches. To be clear, both of these hybrid approaches remain substantially subaltern in the North American context.
In this light, Homeopaths' discursive grievances about Naturopaths' homeopathic practice patterns might be understood as emblematic of Homeopaths' broader felt sense of epistemic marginalization, in which they feel impelled to defend their occupation's epistemic integrity. What is theoretically important here is the degree to which subaltern Homeopaths direct their frustrations toward Naturopaths: another biomedically-marginalized therapeutic occupation. In constructing Naturopaths--a visible, proximal target—as opponents, Homeopaths turn their attention away from the (comparatively-invisible, culturally-‘neutral’) hegemonic discourses which ultimately produce the context for both occupations' marginality. This tendency is also evident with reference to the Ontario government's decision not to grant Homeopaths a ‘doctor title’ at the time of regulation, as one Homeopath deplores: Any Naturopath is called Doctor, Chiropractors are called Doctor, but why not Homeopaths? H12
Indeed, interviewed Homeopaths neither object on principle to statutory regulation, the doctor title construct, nor the third-party insurance construct: hegemonic statutory and civic discourses. Rather, by striving toward adherence with these hegemonic professionalization discourses, they subtly consent to their own subordination, even as they continue to diverge occupationally from biomedical epistemic norms.
Naturopaths, by contrast, had little to say about Homeopaths. In fact, survey data suggest an emergent and historically-notable naturopathic shift away from homeopathic practice. In a 2000 survey of Canadian Naturopaths—the majority of whom had been trained in Ontario—just 1.7% reported ‘never’ using homeopathy in clinical practice ( Verhoef et al., 2006 ); this proportion has today increased to 19.9% ( Table 1 ), almost a twelve-fold increase. Further, in 2000, 79.3% of Canadian Naturopaths endorsed homeopathy as one of their profession's five most important therapeutic practices (Verhoef et al., 2006). Today, by contrast, just 62.3% of Ontario Naturopaths indicated that homeopathy had a clear place in their profession whatsoever ( Table 2 ), with 22.1% believing there was no longer a place for homeopathy within naturopathy.
When asked about homeopathy, interviewed Ontario Naturopaths expressed a range of views which, as shown in what follows, suggest considerable epistemic stress as to homeopathy's role within naturopathy's practice scope. Those who explicitly distanced themselves from homeopathy did so with reference to the practice's reported incommensurability with biomedical science, identifying themselves as closely-aligned to hegemonic biomedicine's evidence-based approach: Most people know at the end of the day, that I prefer evidence-based and that they're not going to get homeopathy … from me. N16.
Some conceded that homeopathic care might produce some clinical benefits ostensibly owing to the placebo effect (a biomedical construct), but sought all the same to distance themselves from the practice on biomedical evidentiary grounds: I would say that mostly the non-evidence based camp [within naturopathy] would argue for homeopathy. … Homeopathy has evidence to support not using it at all in my opinion. I think that the effects we tend to see clinically for homeopathy are most likely placebo effect. N5
The two preceding excerpts show how some Naturopaths adopt a hegemonic discourse in which biomedical evidence is constructed as a neutral referent against which homeopathy's merits become measured. Such a discourse is not, however, universal among Ontario Naturopaths, a strong majority of whom (80.1%, Table 1 ) report using some form of homeopathy in clinical practice. In fact, some interviewed Naturopaths explicitly contest the presumptive universality of biomedical evidence as arbiter of clinical validity: Some people do very well with homeopathy. … and I find I can get into arguments with people because they don't understand that experience is evidence-based medicine. N7
Here one hears echoes of Hardiman and Mukharji (2012) , who—writing about subaltern therapeutic groups—observe how such practitioners may discursively exploit hegemonic concepts by modifying and deploying such concepts to their own ends. Above, the interviewed Naturopath (a member of an elite but biomedically-marginalized occupation) seeks to lift up (subaltern) homeopathic practice by validating ‘experience’ —typically derided as ‘anecdote’ in bioscientific contexts ( Derkatch 2008 )— on par with ‘empirical’ knowledge produced through hegemonic biomedical means.
Other homeopathy-supportive Naturopaths characterized their own clinical use of the practice as a means to not only advance patients' health goals but also to efficiently bolster Naturopaths’ professional reputability: There can be a lot of positive change quickly [with homeopathy] … It’s a way of making a quick fast fix. And so [patients] like it. It keeps them encouraged to keep trying with the rest of their lifestyle. Because they experience a difference. It’s a way of bringing people back in, a way of showing the expertise we have. N14
For most interviewed Naturopaths, however, homeopathy's position was more fraught: at once a valued therapeutic modality and a treatment approach burdened with potential pitfalls in the civic sphere, owing to homeopathy's disalignment with biomedical evidentiary discourse. Illustrative of epistemic stress, some indicated that they were reluctant to use the practice, except in carefully-delimited contexts: I think homeopathy is a really powerful, interesting, beast of a medicine. I also have a lot of referrals from medical doctors in the community, and that might influence my tendency to not use things that aren't as evidence-based – especially with those patients. N15 If [the patient is] a little bit more science oriented, I'm not going to pull out homeopathy as the first thing that I present to them unless I see that truly is the one and only first thing they really, really need. N9
Others expressed reluctance to speak about homeopathy in public, despite their belief in the practice's merits: Homeopathy? There’s nothing in the science to explain it. … Patients feel relief but it is something that I will avoid talking about in public. N12 I love [homeopathy]. … [But,] homeopathy is a hugely inflammatory topic and I don't even like talking about it at dinner parties. If someone asks me what I think about it, it's just this sting that you kind of want to avoid. A lot of the things in naturopathic medicine feel like an uphill battle. I just don't have the energy a lot of the time. N15
Ultimately, like their anti-homeopathy colleagues, interviewed Naturopaths who did not oppose the practice outright remained hesitant to broadcast their occupation's inclusion of homeopathy within its scope, for fear this might “devalu [e] our work” (N15) and compromise naturopathy's elite standing: We’re trying to present ourselves to the government, to hospitals, to mainstream delivery organizations, and there’s the liability to be associated with that mystery called homeopathy. right. … My view of the evidence is that it’s mixed. N13 I'm very comfortable with saying just because I don't I'm understand something doesn't mean it doesn't work. But I think that there are a lot of great options that we have that have more evidence, that don't make us look crazy. N16
Despite homeopathy's ongoing widespread usage among Naturopaths, considerable epistemic stress is evident intra-occupationally, whether between practitioners with different views, between Naturopaths and biomedical health care providers, with patients, regulators or with reference to public institutions. This stress, emblematic of the strong epistemic tensions between homeopathy and hegemonic biomedicine, appears to be eroding homeopathy's standing with the naturopathic occupation, including at the institutional level. Two respondents, both naturopathic educators at Ontario's naturopathic college, affirmed: [The training is] increasingly more biomedically-focused. There's a kind of devaluation of homeopathy in the curriculum. N1 There's a segment at the College who are so evidence-based that if there isn't a study they won't prescribe anything. One of them has publicly said there's no data for homeopathy, and would never use it. N6
In the South Asian context, Hardiman and Mukharji (2012 :8) have observed that practices once central within particular therapeutic traditions may “c [o]me to be marginalized” within or even “externed from” the elite versions of these systems. In Ontario, Naturopaths feel at once compelled to align themselves with hegemonic evidentiary constructs to sustain and bolster their (tenuous) elite standing while they remain, internally, an occupation characterized by epistemic hybridity and the inclusion of subaltern practices such as homeopathy. In this light, Naturopaths hardly appear the bogeymen responsible for Ontario Homeopaths’ ongoing struggles, but instead another occupational group struggling to contend with hegemonic forces.
In fact, Ontario Naturopaths' internal struggles recall those faced in the 1990s by Britain's professionalizing lay Homeopaths. In their article entitled “The Reluctant Homeopaths,” Cant and Sharma (1995 :756) documented the intra-occupational tensions evident amidst British Homeopaths' pursuit of legitimacy-via-professionalization. There, practitioners and leaders alike struggled as to “how far they should accommodate the demands of the orthodox medical profession … [and] how far they should align themselves to the scientific paradigm”. Like early North American Naturopaths, British Homeopaths of the nineteenth century had comprised a small, disparate group of prescribers held together by the charisma of the founding teachers and a revolutionary spirit. This spirit has gradually been eroded and replaced by formalised courses, curricula and organisations ( Cant and Sharma, 1995 :756).
As British homeopathic practitioners sought greater elite standing and adopted hegemonic professionalization discourses as their own, the occupation experienced a movement away from seeing homoeopathic knowledge as sufficient without recourse to allopathic [biomedical] practices –- a tempering of homeopathic claims and ideals ( Cant and Sharma, 1995 :754).
To what degree Ontario's homeopathically-reluctant Naturopaths and naturopathically-envious Homeopaths will consent to hegemonic biomedical science being the arbiter of validity for their central therapeutic approaches in exchange for more stable, elite standing remains to be seen. For Homeopaths, whose occupational identity rests upon a subaltern epistemic framework, and who remain—despite their regulated status—locked out of key hegemonic mechanisms of occupational validation, the climb may be steep. For Naturopaths, however, a consensual adherence to biomedicine's evidentiary parameters may prove to be a compromise they calculate as worthwhile, leaving homeopathy and Homeopaths behind.

Section: 6. Conclusions

With reference to the North American practice of homeopathy and an empirical case involving statutorily-regulated Homeopaths and Naturopaths in Ontario, Canada, this work has demonstrated usage of the concept of therapeutic subalternity--a novel theoretical framework developed by Attewell, Hardiman, Lambert and Mukherji—to a North American case study. The paper consolidates this theory through references to Gramsci's original concept of subalternity and Baer's analysis of TCAM in the global North, and demonstrates its application in new contexts.
Overall, this study observes how statutory regulation may be a necessary but insufficient condition for establishing a health occupational group's elite standing in global North contexts. Drawing attention to a range of civil society factors, and engaging with the concept of epistemic stress, the construct of therapeutic subalternity has usefully illuminated a range of historical as well as epistemic and evidentiary, economic, inter- and intra-occupational considerations faced by two distinctive heterodox health care occupations who differentially engage with a particular, strongly-marginalized health care practice . As shown in the present work, TCAM occupations may share hegemonic conditions of struggle, but are not internally uniform; nor will the professionalization trajectory of one necessarily predict another. Further, two heterodox therapeutic occupations may engage in considerably distinctive ways with a therapeutic modality which, at its face, might appear singular.
The survey and interview data that informed the study's empirical case may not represent the full range of views evident within each of the studied occupations. Nevertheless, the perspectives garnered from these data help demonstrate the complex range of contextual factors concurrently negotiated by professionalizing TCAM practitioner groups in global North settings. Moving forward, scholars of therapeutic pluralism working in North America and other industrialized contexts who seek a robust theoretical framework to contend with several such factors at once, may engage with—and build upon—the theory of therapeutic subalternity presented here.

Section: Acknowledgments

This study was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research . Many thanks to Professors Heather Boon and Sandy Welsh for their support and collaboration on the broader project, and for their valuable feedback on this work.
