Title: Security from above and below: A critical ethnography of the health response to violence against women in Timor-Leste


Abstract: Abstract

International advocacy and evidence have been critical for shifting the pervasive issue of violence against women onto the health agenda. Guidelines and training packages, however, can be underpinned by Western principles of responding to individual survivors of violence and availability of specialist referral services, which may not be available in many countries. As Timor-Leste and other nations begin to build their health system response to violence against women, it is important to understand the current practices of health providers and the broader sociocultural context of providing care to survivors of violence. During 11 months in the field (February–December 2016), we conducted qualitative interviews with 48 midwives and community leaders in three municipalities in Timor-Leste. The findings reveal that midwives engage at both the individual and collective levels, providing medical care, advice and moral support to survivors of violence as well as gathering support for women within families and communities. Midwives therefore navigate both formal and informal spaces as they respond to domestic and sexual violence. In doing so, they are influenced by their own experiences as women, as health providers imbued with authoritative knowledge, and as part of the wider sociocultural system. We argue that while much progress has been made in frameworks for health systems responding to survivors of violence, more work needs to be done to understand how to support health providers in low- and middle-income countries as they engage with perpetrators, families and communities. There is a need for further discussion of how health systems can address the issue of domestic and sexual violence as a collective social problem, while foregrounding the needs and rights of those experiencing violence. This research has implications for the content of guidelines and training, and importantly, for developing mechanisms to deal with complex social issues within local health services.

Section: 1. Introduction

Over the past two decades there have been important gains in drawing attention to the ‘epidemic’ of violence against women. Women are much more likely to be subjected to physical, sexual and psychological abuse from an intimate partner or family member than they are from a stranger, and this is commonly known as domestic violence. Non-partner sexual violence is also a significant issue, and is higher in societies where it is tolerated ( Kalra and Bhugra, 2013 ) and in situations of conflict, post-conflict and displacement ( Sidebotham et al., 2016 ). Around 35% of women worldwide have experienced physical and/or sexual violence by an intimate partner or non-partner sexual violence ( WHO et al., 2013 ), which will henceforth be referred to as domestic and sexual violence. The detrimental effects of these forms of violence on physical, mental and reproductive health are significant, with women more likely to suffer maternal morbidity , sexually transmitted infections, depression, attempted suicide, injury and death ( Taft and Watson, 2015 ; WHO, 2013a , b ). Women who experience violence are also less likely to have control over their reproductive choices: they report less participation in decision-making about birth spacing and are more likely to have a partner stop them from using contraception or have an unintended pregnancy ( Taft and Watson, 2015 ; The Asia Foundation, 2016 ).
Nurses, midwives and doctors are among the key service providers who should be able to recognise signs of abuse, provide first-line support and refer women for help ( WHO, 2014) . Training and clinical guidelines focus on providing woman-centred care which emphasises self-determination, providing information and following the woman's wishes ( WHO, 2013 ; 2014 ). These guidelines are based on the best evidence available internationally, predominantly from high-income countries. However, guidelines are implemented in diverse settings, often in vastly different sociocultural landscapes. In many of these settings women marry into and live with their husband's family, decisions are made collectively or by the head of the household, separation and divorce are discouraged and there are limited referral services available. Inevitably, health providers are influenced by and often reinforce dominant cultural beliefs, which has powerful implications for the way in which they respond to women experiencing violence from their partner ( Kim and Motsei, 2002 ; Grenfell, 2018 ).
Together with Afghanistan, Timor-Leste has the highest 12-month prevalence rate of intimate partner violence in the Asia-Pacific region ( UNFPA, 2019 ). The Timorese government, with support from UN agencies, is developing national guidelines for a health system response to domestic and sexual violence. However, there is very little information about what health providers are currently doing, their strengths, and areas for improvement. This research provides empirical evidence of how midwives, as primary health providers for women and children, respond to domestic and sexual violence in Timor-Leste. The aim is to provide insight into how the health system can be strengthened to respond to domestic and sexual violence, and how international evidence and guidelines can be adapted to the realities of the sociocultural and health system context in Timor-Leste, and other countries with similar social and demographic characteristics.

Section: 2. Study setting

Timor-Leste achieved independence in 2002 after 25 years of violent occupation by Indonesia. It is a small, mountainous nation on the UN list of Least Developed Countries. It has a population of just over 1 million of which 70% live rurally ( NSD, UNFPA, 2011 ). With a history of Portuguese colonisation, Timor-Leste remains a strongly Catholic society where divorce is legal but discouraged. Although women played an important role in the resistance against Indonesian occupation and there are high rates of political participation by women, Timorese society is characterised as patriarchal ( Grenfell, 2018 ) and the war left a legacy of violent masculinities ( Myrttinen, 2005 ). This history continues to play out in the lives of women. Between 34% and 47% of women in Timor-Leste have experienced physical and/or sexual violence from their partner in the past 12 months, and more than 70% of both men and women experienced physical and/or sexual abuse as children ( The Asia Foundation, 2016 ; GDS et al., 2018 ).
Since Timor-Leste gained independence there has been more focus on addressing domestic and sexual violence. A landmark Law Against Domestic Violence was enacted in 2010, establishing a legal framework for protection and assistance for victims, as well as prevention of domestic violence. A National Action Plan on Gender-based Violence was ratified in 2012 and again in 2017. The Plan outlined the responsibility of government and civil society in community prevention, the provision of health and social services, access to justice , and coordination, monitoring and evaluation ( SEM, 2017 ). Over the past decade there has been significant progress in the establishment of services for victims of violence, including the police Vulnerable Persons’ Unit, safe houses ( uma mahon ) in selected municipalities, and economic assistance programs to help vulnerable women and children. Timorese NGO, PRADET, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health, has implemented calm places ( fatin hakmatek) for victims of violence on the grounds of five municipal hospitals. They are staffed by trained health personnel and provide forensic documentation of injuries , emergency counselling, medical treatment, temporary accommodation and basic essentials such as food, transport and clothing. They have also developed a national Medical Forensic Protocol and trained more than 50 medical forensic examiners (midwives and doctors). Despite this, most (66%) Timorese women who experience abuse tell no one about it ( The Asia Foundation, 2016 ). When they do seek help it is most likely to be from friends and family, and sometimes police and community leaders ( The Asia Foundation, 2016 ; GDS et al., 2018 ). Women who experience violence may seek health care for their injuries, but few (37%) disclose the real cause of injury to health care workers ( The Asia Foundation, 2016 ). Much of the population lives in remote areas, far from referral services, so it can be difficult to get help. On the other hand, 84% of women have at least one antenatal care visit, 77% of women have four or more visits, 57% of women birth with a skilled attendant and 35% of women have a postnatal checkup ( GDS et al., 2018 ). Around half the women who attend these routine reproductive health services will have experienced domestic violence in the past 12 months. Midwives are the primary providers of reproductive health services for women and are particularly well placed to identify chronic physical and psychological signs of abuse and support women to access further help. Midwives make up one quarter of health providers working in health posts, community health centres and referral hospitals throughout the 13 municipalities of Timor-Leste ( Hou et al., 2016 ).

Section: 3. Methods

This study is grounded in critical medical anthropology ( Panter-Brick and Eggerman, 2018 ; Singer and Baer, 1995 ) and critical ethnography ( Soyini Madison, 2005 ). This approach seeks to document diverse sociocultural viewpoints and shed light on how the intersections of culture, history, power and social institutions impact upon people's lives. We also draw on Bourdieu's (1980) analysis of social order and change to examine the extent to which midwives and community leaders impose or challenge cultural norms and dominant values toward violence in their everyday work. We aim to inform health systems approaches in Timor-Leste based on the lived experience of midwives working on the front-line and to increase the relevance of international guidelines on health responses to domestic and sexual violence within diverse settings.
We used in-depth qualitative interviews to examine the perspectives of midwives and community leaders in three municipalities of Timor-Leste that were selected because of their high rates of physical and/or sexual violence ( NSD et al. 2010 ) ( Table 1 ). Table 1 . Selection of study municipalities based on percentage of women aged 15–49 who have experienced different forms of violence. Study Municipality % of women who have ever experienced physical violence since age 15 % of women who have experienced physical violence in the past 12 months % of women who have experienced physical violence OFTEN in the past 12 months % of ever-pregnant women who have ever experienced physical violence during pregnancy % of women who have ever experienced sexual violence Dili 52.7 32.8 1.0 3.3 2.3 Baucau 44.3 34.5 3.5 4.7 7.0 Liquica 34.5 25.7 0.0 12.3 4.5 Source: NSD et al., 2010
The research is a collaboration between the National University of Timor-Leste (UNTL), Dili and La Trobe University, Melbourne. The Australian researcher was based at UNTL between February and December 2016 while carrying out the study. Ethical approval was obtained from the National Institute of Health (INS), Ministry of Health, Timor-Leste (Ref No. HRD-2016-0007) and La Trobe University, Australia (Ref No. HEC16-023). Permission to carry out the research was granted by the municipal health administration office in each study municipality. The interviewers consisted of a female Australian researcher (medical anthropologist with limited local language), a female Timorese researcher (lecturer in midwifery) and a male Timorese researcher (lecturer in public health). At the beginning of data collection, the Australian researcher led the interviews and one of the Timorese researchers translated. Later when they felt more confident, the Timorese researchers led the interviews and the Australian researcher observed and clarified questions as they arose. Initially we intended to match the gender of interviewer and participant, but this was more loosely followed in the field depending on what the participants preferred. For example, if there was more than one midwife who wanted to be interviewed individually, the Timorese researchers split off to interview the midwives separately. At other times all three researchers were present for group interviews, with one leading the conversation and the others taking notes. All researchers had experience in qualitative interviewing around sensitive topics and underwent additional training (from co-author AT, an experienced domestic violence scholar) on the WHO (2001) Ethical and Safety Recommendations for Research on Domestic Violence.
Selection criteria for participants included anyone employed as a midwife within a government or non-government health service or anyone recognised as a community leader (i.e. village or hamlet chief or traditional leader, but also church representatives, domestic violence social workers or police). Within these broad criteria we aimed to sample for maximum variation, that is, to capture a wide variety of views and experiences in different health care settings. In the study municipalities, we visited midwives in remote health posts, in sub-district health centres, municipal (district) health centres, hospitals and referral services with midwives on staff (a fatin hakmatek and a safe house) to explain the research and invite them to participate in interviews. Because the female Timorese researcher was a lecturer and former midwife, she knew some of the midwife participants. We observed that this was helpful in establishing trust and explained upfront that people were not obliged to participate in an interview and participants would remain anonymous. For community leaders we followed a snowball sampling technique where we asked participating midwives who they worked with or would like to work with in the community to address domestic violence, then visited these people in their village or place of work to explain the research and invite them to participate.
From May to July 2016 a total of 32 in-depth interviews and five group discussions were conducted with 48 participants. This included 36 midwives and 12 community participants across the three study municipalities ( Table 2 ). Forty participants were women (all 36 midwives, two social workers, one nun and one police officer) and eight participants were men (all five village and hamlet chiefs, one priest and two police officers). Table 2 . Number of midwife and community interviews and group discussions in each study municipality. Study Municipality Midwives Community Total Individual Interviews Group discussions Individual Interviews Group discussions Individual Interviews Group discussions Dili 9 1 (2p) 4 0 13 1 (2p) Baucau 8 1 (2p) 1 (6p) 4 1 (2p) 12 3 (10p) Liquica 5 1 (4p) 2 0 7 1 (4p) Total 22 4 (14p) 10 1 (2p) 32 5 (16p) p = people.
Participants were given a Participant Information Sheet in the local language Tetun and provided either their written consent or verbal consent witnessed by a second researcher. Interviews were guided by semi-structured open-ended questions covering the midwives’ education and work history, their knowledge of domestic violence and health problems, their attitudes about domestic violence, their practices when a woman has disclosed violence, and challenges and opportunities in responding. A more succinct version of the questions was developed for community leaders. Interviews were generally conducted in Tetun, interspersed with their local dialect or Indonesian where the participant preferred. Two interviews were conducted in English. Interviews averaged 34 min (range 17 min - 1 h 45 min). As some interviews were short, we spent time reflecting on interview style and how researchers could probe more deeply. All interviews were audio-recorded, except for one interview with two police officers who preferred not to be recorded but consented to notes being taken. For this interview detailed notes were taken by one researcher while the other was conducting the interview. Audio tapes were transcribed verbatim and translated into English by two Timorese researchers not involved in the interviews. A sample of the translations were cross-checked by one of the original interviewers to ensure accuracy and any ambiguous meanings not understood by the Australian researcher were clarified through discussion within the research team. Transcription, translation and cross-checking of the audio tapes was labour intensive and time consuming but essential to properly analyse and comprehend the data, and vital when working across language.
All interview transcripts and notes were imported into NVivo version 11. The lead author (KW) coded all interviews into categories based on areas of inquiry in the interview questions as well as issues that emerged during the interviews. The central categories concerned participant's practices (sub-categories focussed on identifying violence, ways of responding, advocacy, referral), values and attitudes (sub-categories were causes of violence, vulnerable women, role of husbands, justification of violence) and their perspectives on what would lead to social change. KW then conducted a conceptual interpretation of the excerpts within each sub-category to examine how midwives' and community participants' accounts of their interactions with survivors of violence are both symbolic of and reproduce broader power relations. The aim was ‘to focus on the simultaneously practical and theoretical problems which emerge in the particular case of the interaction between the investigator and the person questioned.’ ( Bourdieu, 1996 , pg 17). Being a cultural outsider, KW worked closely with Timorese colleagues during data interpretation and writing to continually cross-check understanding. The initial themes were workshopped with the whole research team but not with the original research participants due to budget and time constraints. The main findings were developed and a series of feedback meetings were held with health facilities in the study municipalities and key NGOs, UN agencies and government departments in Dili before finalising the implications for practice and disseminating the in-country report ( Wild et al., 2016 ). This article was based on themes that emerged around participants' values and practices in responding to domestic and sexual violence and the possibilities they saw for challenging power relations and social norms. Verbatim accounts are included to illustrate the main points.

Section: 4. Findings

The findings demonstrate the diverse ways in which midwives respond to domestic and sexual violence. Clear themes emerged around how midwives advocated for survivors at the individual level and referred them to formal services, which is in line with the current discourse on how health providers should respond. However, there was also evidence that they reinforced traditional gender roles, engaged collectively with families and communities, and with informal systems such as the church and customary dispute resolution. Therefore the findings are presented to highlight the diverse ways in which midwives and community leaders are engaging at the individual, collective, formal and informal levels. Finally, a summary of participants’ perspectives on ways forward indicates that if we are to adequately address the magnitude and complexity of domestic and sexual violence, we need to both build on and challenge the multiple ways in which midwives and community leaders are currently working.

Section: 5. Individual counselling and support

In addition to basic medical care, a major theme in how midwives responded was ‘counselling’. This ranged from giving women advice to providing information or moral support and included: encouraging a woman to seek further assistance; providing information on self-care; helping her find a solution to her problems; and telling her to believe in herself and have courage to face the future. Midwives likened this to sharing ‘from the heart’. Some midwives described how they empathised with women, showed their concern, stood united, felt bad for and cried with them because ‘as women we feel it too when they are treated badly’. While most participants were able to empathise with women, some had strong ‘feminist’ values and sought to challenge the status quo in their practice and in their communities. When asked where these values come from, one participant said: I see it as the right thing to do…like coming from a background of family like that. – 7. Domestic violence social worker
In contrast, some midwives felt it was their role to advise women or ‘show her a good way’. This advice tended to focus on what the woman could do to prevent violence. It was common for midwives from all three study districts to advise women not to provoke their husband or ‘look for trouble’, to be patient, be a good wife and keep the peace in their relationship. Give counselling to the mother to change her behaviour...many times we don't blame only the husband. Sometimes we ask the wife ‘why did your husband hit you?’ If she said something that made her husband feel no good, we remind her not to do it again – 25. Midwife, Liquica Usually when women show their good attitude there is less risk [of violence]. But women who show their ego, they think they are very strong, sometimes they are the ones who get violence. – 14. Midwife, Baucau I also help them through advising them how to be a good mother…If you don't want to get domestic violence, when your husband comes home from work leave him to relax, breathe fresh air then tell him your problem. – 16. Midwife, Baucau
In the absence of guidelines, training or a good understanding of what they should do, midwives largely drew upon their own experience and values. Midwives themselves acknowledged they were never taught about domestic or sexual violence in their pre-service training or in their work and so provided advice ‘according to our own thinking’. Most midwives asked for further training and support from senior colleagues to help them respond well.

Section: 6. Collective support and intervening

While some midwives were reluctant to get involved, other midwives from all three municipalities gave examples of how they intervened with husbands and together as couples. This sometimes took the form of ‘couple counselling’ which involved sitting together and giving them ideas about how to solve problems, talk to each other without using strong words or violence, of what are good and bad deeds, encouraging them to live together more peacefully, telling them to care for, forgive and accept each other, or to think of their children's future. We help with the counselling, give information that as husband and wife we sit together, talk to each other to solve the problem. We don't need other people to know, moreover if the case is known by the police, it will make shame for the husband and wife. If there is a problem between husband and wife sit together and solve it. – 25. Midwives group discussion , Liquica
Some midwives, particularly those with woman-centred values, described how they acted as an advocate for women. Some met with the abusive husband to explain the effects of violence on pregnancy, how women needed more rest during pregnancy, that they must speak nicely to their wife, clarify any misunderstanding around a woman suspected of cheating, or to warn the husband not to repeat the violence. Sometimes we see the woman's situation like this and we explain to the husband ‘don't do this to the pregnant woman’. But they say to us ‘it's not your right, you are a health provider, you don't have any rights over this. I am the one who gave dearly to her family [bride price], if she makes a mistake, I have the right to teach her’. – 2. Midwife, Dili
Many midwives gave examples of husbands who were drunk, shouted at them, did not accept their opinion or said it was not their right to get involved. A few midwives said they actively discouraged the husband from coming to the clinic in order to protect the woman and their own safety. Midwives who had received training on domestic violence felt they were supported by the Law and were therefore less intimidated by husbands.
Midwives recognised the important role of family members in providing women with safety, support, and information, and in reporting abuse to police. It was common for midwives to play an advocacy role with the woman's family. This most often occurred when women had experienced severe physical violence or when young women were pregnant and had been abandoned by their partner. Advocating within the family involved sitting together with the woman's family or her in-laws to increase support and reduce isolation, helping to ‘resolve’ the problem, encouraging reporting of the incident to the police, or reducing her vulnerability (for example by explaining the importance of birth spacing or not eating last at meal times).
Community leaders were an important resource for midwives in dealing with domestic violence. Many participants said victims of violence would go directly to community leaders for help. Some midwives worked with community leaders to address specific cases or in health promotion and outreach. Village chiefs ( chefe suco ) and hamlet chiefs ( chefe aldeia ) were seen as equally important in their roles as community leaders, but participants also mentioned lia na'in (traditional arbitrators), ‘older people we trust’, and youth leaders as having a role in addressing domestic violence in their village.
While nearly all midwives emphasised the involvement of community leaders in domestic violence, midwives in Liquica (a municipality with no formal domestic violence referral service) were more likely to mention only community leaders. Participants gave many reasons why it was appropriate to involve community leaders: they were well-respected; knew everyone in the community; were always ready to respond and could be woken in the night; were chosen and liked by the people; had a good relationship with the community; brought experience; and were trusted by the community to make good decisions. One midwife pointed out the variation in interest and capacity of different community leaders in being able to respond to domestic violence. The head of village is very good. When the community have a small problem, they go straight to see the head of village and he solves their problem. If he cannot solve their problems, then he gives them money to pay for transportation to go to the police station. – 16. Midwife, Baucau

Section: 7. Informal systems

Community leaders interviewed for this study were asked about their role and how they went about resolving cases of domestic violence. While one village council had developed a task force to deal with issues of domestic violence and village-level disputes, it was more common for community participants to describe the customs and traditional law used for resolving conflict in the family and the community. One community leader said his role was not to separate couples but to solve their issues. Resolving family disputes often meant sitting down with both sides of the couple's family, Feto Saan (man's family) and Umane (woman's family), together with an audience or authority figures such as lia na'in or community police. Both sides of the family needed to agree to come together and it became very difficult if either party did not want to solve the problem. They would then use traditional law ( tara bandu ) to ‘press them’ to avoid violence. This could involve both parties signing an agreement not to repeat the violence. This agreement would outline the actions to be taken if the violence was repeated, including involvement of the court. The punishment for the perpetrator depended on what the wife's family called for, which could involve a fine such as giving buffalo, goats or money to ‘close the shame’. They may also hang traditional cloth ( tais ) to symbolise recognition of their actions and re-acceptance of each other.
Community leaders also spoke extensively about providing moral support, guidance and advice. This involved telling the husband not to be violent and to respect his wife, reminding them of their commitment to each other and explaining why violence was not good for their family and was setting a bad example. There was a perception that giving good advice reduced the trauma people were experiencing, that they were less afraid when they knew the community leader was there to help. If the couple re-accepted each other, a solution was seen to be reached. We tell her husband, tell the family members because otherwise in the house the mother-in-law can look at the woman and not give support, only support their son. It happens, so I call them to explain to them to reduce the violence and you will see some benefit. – 20. Community Leader, Baucau
Some community participants explained how resolving violence through family and culture was effective because they observed the perpetrator did not repeat the violence. They said sanctions were rarely breached because traditional elders were respected and breaking an agreement would mean disrespect for authority figures.
Resolving in the family or through custom, however, was generally considered inappropriate for serious crimes, in which case some participants said they would refer the woman to police or the safe house. There was recognition by one village chief that he was unable to close a case if it involved a serious crime, even if the victim did not want to pursue it. A police participant felt strongly that if the case was not processed according to the national Law then the perpetrator would not change his behaviour. The law does not permit domestic violence to be solved at home or with family. If we don't process the case, the perpetrator of the violence will not be wary of their actions, they will not change their behaviour to the woman and children. – 27. Police participant
A few midwives explained they would refer cases of domestic violence to priests and nuns. For some participants, counselling from church representatives was seen as important for keeping couples together and helping them to reconcile their differences. One midwife explained the church was a neutral space and there was less risk to her own safety if she referred women there rather than involving police. In some instances, the church's approach was viewed as the opposite of both the police and the formal legal system, which were perceived to focus on punishment and separation. The two church representatives interviewed spoke extensively about their role in counselling couples who were not getting along, including relationships where domestic violence was occurring. Counselling involved getting the couple to meet together, listening to each side, being patient and not judging, punishing or taking sides. They described how the aim was to get the couple to understand their problems rather than blame each other, and recognise their mistakes and the impact it was having on their children. They encouraged the couple to reconcile their differences and find a solution together because ‘those who make the problems must solve the problems’. It was important to respect each other, promote honesty, and teach forgiveness. They would often remind couples of their commitment to each other, not to look to the past but to focus on improving their lives and their families. They felt they provided advice and moral guidance to help couples love each other again. ‘The biggest challenge is when both of them are not honest with each other. When they are in front of us and they only tell lies and defend themselves, we do not find a solution. If we call a traditional elder to solve the problem, certainly they will kill a buffalo and pig. This will not help but will affect the economy in their household. It's better if they come here and we help them to find the root of the problem. – 35. Male church representative
It appears church representatives adopted a personal and advisory role in domestic violence cases, as friend, brother/sister or mother/father, which contrasted with the desire of service providers to emphasise their professional role. The madre [nun] participant articulated the tendency of families to keep violence hidden in order to manage stigma, but that this is starting to change. Based on history, violence always happens and it is a family secret, people never open their problems. But nowadays everything is open so it is coming out – 34. Female church representative
She explained how she provided shelter and protection to women experiencing violence, warned husbands not to be violent in the future, monitored couples, called them and approached them in the street. The padre [priest] participant said speaking about domestic violence in mass was an effective way to reach a large number of people. Church representatives said they focussed on counselling and did not refer women to other organisations. While they welcomed the Law Against Domestic Violence, they did not want to promote divorce. We don't refer, we never refer. Based on my experience if I refer them to another place it will not solve their household's problem…I don't know the people [at the service] so I can't recommend her to go. – 34. Female church representative

Section: 8. Formal services

Participants often mentioned the role police played in security for both victims and midwives. This was particularly important for midwives in rural health centres and health posts due to a lack of other referral services, as well as the fact police lived in the communities and had access to transport and the capacity to apprehend perpetrators. Half the participants did not know about the Law Against Domestic Violence and the protection it could offer women and children. Community leaders were more likely than midwives to know about the Law, and some had a good understanding that domestic violence is a public crime and should be reported to police. There were, however, mixed views as to whether the police were effective in deterring violent behaviour.
There were instances where midwives felt reporting to police could put themselves or a woman in further danger, and midwives were concerned they could become included in household problems. Some said police involvement could create shame for the family or lead the husband to abandon his wife and children. Other examples included police taking a long time to attend a case, not turning up at all or ignoring repeated cases of abuse. There was a sense from participants that the police response was improving, and this was facilitated by building relationships between police and service providers.
Midwives frequently mentioned referring women to safe houses operating in Dili and the municipalities, and services provided by the NGO PRADET ( fatin hakmatek as well as counselling services). They also mentioned other social, economic and legal services provided by NGOs. Midwives who had made referrals said they received a good response from services, the process generally went smoothly, and they thought these services were important for helping women out of very violent situations. Some said domestic violence services were critical to women's and children's physical, mental and emotional wellbeing because they provided food, accommodation and protection in the short-term, regular counselling and support while their case proceeded through the courts, and in the longer-term their ultimate reintegration with family or in the community. One participant pointed out the necessity of midwives working within these services to avoid women being transferred to hospital for basic medical care.
When midwives spoke about the challenges of referring, it was mostly because women refused a referral. They said women were worried about going to the police because they were dependent on their husband, they feared it would jeopardise their safety or they were worried about what would happen with their children. When we asked 'why don't you want to tell us about your problem?' She said 'if I tell you then you will tell the police. When I go back home I will feel insecure, my husband will get angry at me, he will not accept me as his wife and who is going to feed my children?' - 2. Midwife, Dili
Midwives said a woman's situation had to be very bad before she agreed to report to the police or be referred to a support service. Knowledgeable midwives considered it important to respect the wishes of the victim and obtain her consent before referring her case further. Some participants saw their role as facilitating or encouraging a woman to access available services, particularly in cases of sexual assault. One participant said it was much easier to meet women's needs when referral services were flexible and would come to the woman or provide transport.

Section: 9. Ways forward

Participants were asked what changes needed to occur to address domestic violence in their community. It was notable that most participants spoke about the need for community education and information about the Law and people's rights, in order to change patriarchal customs and encourage women to speak out about violence. Some social and cultural norms were seen as barriers to reducing violence, including men as the heads of the family, a lack of respect for women, and using barlaki (bride price) to symbolise the ownership of women. Domestic violence happens because of culture, an example is when a woman gets married, her parents ask for many things from her husband's family such as horses and buffalos, so when a man gets angry he can beat his wife and he says ‘I am not beating you, I am beating my horses and buffalos that my family gave to your family’. He can hit his wife because he gave [bride price] to his wife's family. I think it's good when this culture changes. – 16. Midwife, Baucau
Public education and community discussion were perceived as effective ways to spread information and promote awareness about domestic violence. Participants said when people have a good understanding of these issues, they can reduce violence in the household, change the normalisation of violence in the community, stop violence worsening and ultimately break the cycle of violence.
When discussing the provision of information, the single most important method was talking with the community through group discussions. Midwives said this was particularly important in more remote villages and could be done during home visits, mobile clinics (SISCa), community activities, health promotion within schools, group antenatal care clinics and more broadly through television and radio. One social worker explained the importance of widespread awareness raising. Bring awareness because if a lot of people know about it, they will be less like to do it. So I think its education, this has to be shared at the community level. − 7. Domestic violence social worker
Midwives in Baucau emphasised the need to strengthen the Law and police security because they were concerned perpetrators were not being adequately sentenced, particularly those who abused children. Midwives in Baucau as well as church representatives spoke about the important role of the Church in ‘changing people's hearts', morals and behaviours, through individual and couple counselling, during mass and through joint health promotion activities.
Social workers, police and midwives in Dili were more likely to talk about the central role of NGOs, the government and its ministries (such as the Ministry of Social Solidarity and Inclusion, Secretary of State for Equality and Inclusion, and individual politicians) and their responsibility for addressing domestic violence at the national, political and legal levels. Some midwives said it was important for the health sector to work with these organisations as well as community leaders to reduce violence within families. One community participant did point out, however, that even though they had a domestic and sexual violence referral network at the municipal level, no one from the health facilities had ever attended. Another participant said the health sector used to be very active in doing promotion through schools but now that was rare.
A few participants noted more people were talking about domestic violence, women were starting to understand they have rights and changes were becoming visible. At the same time, they emphasised changing attitudes, behaviours and culture takes time, and socialisation and community engagement on these issues must be done regularly.

Section: 10. Discussion

This research examined how midwives in Timor-Leste respond to issues of domestic and sexual violence, both individually with women and couples and collectively with their families and communities, and how they move between formal and informal systems in helping survivors of violence. At the individual level, midwives see themselves as a source of medical care and moral support. This supportive role is important as women with supportive networks are more likely to have better physical and mental wellbeing and improved safety ( Taft et al., 2011 ). It was evident however, that midwives' responses fell across a broad spectrum. Many midwives, particularly in Baucau, said they advised women to keep quiet and not provoke their husband. While this was presented as a safety strategy to try and prevent violence, perhaps embedded in midwives' own experiences, it has the effect of reinforcing the subordination of women and reproducing social inequality. This problematic response is not unique to Timor-Leste. Research from Malaysia, Sri Lanka and South Africa found nurses give similar advice to women experiencing abuse ( Infanti et al., 2015 ; Colombini et al., 2013 ; Garuge, 2012; Kim and Motsei, 2002 ). Pierre Bourdieu articulates the reproduction of these inequalities in terms of ‘symbolic power’ and ‘symbolic violence’ in that these ways of thinking and doing are so deeply embodied they form people's taken-for-granted understanding of the world ( Barrett, 2015 ). It is, therefore, notable that there were midwives and social workers who actively challenged these traditional roles. They were able to articulate the historical and structural influences on women's oppression and actively sought to manoeuvre within and subvert them by intervening with families and engaging with communities. In this way the values of midwives are, to varying degrees, both pre-constructed and shifting. This further reinforces the central role of authority figures such as health workers and community leaders in being afforded the resources to reflect on and challenge these inhabited gender and power relations.
While there is little doubt that religion and custom impact on gender relations in Timor-Leste, there were examples of participants finding ways to re-frame religion and culture in terms of gender equality and avoidance of violence. It appeared that participants’ religious identification did not dictate their values surrounding domestic violence or their response to it. For example, some midwives who saw themselves as religious had feminist values and encouraged speaking out about violence, while others reiterated the role of women in being submissive. In addition, there was a difference between how patriarchy is constructed in formal religious discourse and how religion is practised, more in terms of faith in God. It was not possible to pinpoint the specific drivers of these different values, but they are likely to be a complex interaction derived from broader Timorese values around belief in God, respect for culture and ancestors, and connection to family.
The advocacy role some midwives adopted and the way they negotiated collective support is significant in the context of Timor-Leste where women tend to live in extended families and autonomous decision-making is not the norm ( Wallace et al., 2019 ). Moreover, because women's autonomy has been associated with increased violence ( Fakir et al., 2016 ), acting without family support may be a risk to both midwives and women. Midwives in this study argued strongly for a family and community-based approach. This is supported by data from Timor-Leste which shows one of the primary reasons women gave for seeking help was encouragement from friends or family and a major reason for not seeking help was fear of giving the family a bad name (The Asia Foundation, 2016). In addition, most women in abusive relationships do not leave ( The Asia Foundation, 2016 ). This heightens the role of family as a risk or protective factor, as abusers become more reluctant to hurt women when women have support from others ( Jayatilleke et al., 2015 ).
Midwives in Timor-Leste are already engaging with husbands, families and community leaders to promote women's safety. However, they are not given any evidence-informed guidance on how to do this safely and there is little support from senior colleagues to do this complex work ( Wild et al., 2019 ). In contrast to recommendations in high-income countries ( Hegarty et al., 2016 ; RACGP, 2014 ), midwives in Timor-Leste are providing counselling to both women and men. In the absence of any men's behaviour change programs in Timor-Leste and very limited support for mental health or substance abuse problems, it is difficult for health professionals to provide appropriate referrals or encourage help-seeking for men who use violence. This research supports findings from other studies that there is an urgent need for clinical guidelines and training resources for health providers on engaging with men (and other family members) who use violence ( Yun Kyo Cho, 2019 ; Morgan et al., 2014 ).
There was wide variation in where midwives referred survivors of violence for further help. For example, some midwives said they would only refer women to the church, some only knew to refer to the police, and others only talked about the role of community leaders in resolving domestic violence issues. This means women's choices are limited by midwives' recommendations. Prescriptive and linear referral steps likewise limit women's choices. For example, the 2010 Law Against Domestic Violence mandates that health providers immediately report cases of domestic violence to the police, but women have multiple needs and likely require assistance from a variety of sources. The literature on domestic violence and access to justice usually portrays a dual system of family and customary law versus formal justice and referral pathways. While some argue that women seldom receive justice under either system ( JSMP, 2013 ; Harper, 2011 ), others see local cultural systems as an important means of increasing protection and options for women ( Hirst, 2016 ; Graydon, 2016 ). The latter view was evident in the prominence midwives in this study gave to engagement with the community and with traditional and church leaders. As Grenfell (2018) argues, engaging in these local spaces is more likely to generate the inside legitimacy that enables traction and meaningful social change. Boarccaech (2018) , also writing on customary and formal justice in Timor-Leste, notes:
‘Although the difference between the two systems may seem obvious (with specific representatives, rules, and places where they occur), in practice this relation is more nuanced. This is because the values, the world views, procedures, methods of punishment, the way responsibility is assigned, the religious affiliation , the agents responsible for representing these systems, among other factors, eventually mix up and influence each other.’ ( Boarccaech, 2018 :197)
Based on this research we argue that health providers should be trained to facilitate access to both formal and informal support for survivors of violence depending on women's circumstances, for two reasons. Firstly, neither formal systems nor informal systems alone provide a pathway for women to reduce the risk and experience of abuse. Secondly, women survivors tend to see the two systems within a continuum of options ( Grenfell, 2018 ; The Asia Foundation, 2015 ). Referral pathways and guidelines are situated in ‘modern’ spaces but rarely reflect the ‘hybridity’ of the traditional and modern that people navigate on a daily basis ( Grenfell, 2018 ). Therefore, it is critical that midwives and other health providers give survivors of violence information about their full range of options and support them to access the help they identify as most appropriate. To this end, it would be useful to conduct further research with survivors of violence in Timor-Leste to more clearly understand their health and safety needs and the specific care and support they want from health providers.
The importance of a health response to domestic and sexual violence has become more widely recognised internationally. While this has resulted in more resources for training health providers to help individual survivors within a formal system of care, midwives in this study clearly outlined their role in working collectively with both formal agencies (government Ministries, NGOs, police, schools) and informal groups (families, community leaders, church representatives) to challenge the customs and social norms that permit domestic and sexual violence. This is reminiscent of Colak and Pearce's (2018) argument for the need to strengthen security from ‘above’ as well as ‘below’. This is because in new states, building security has focused more on training and adoption of new values by formal institutions, and less on supporting communities to gain their own understanding of the issues and build their own consensus on the kind of security they need ( Colak and Pearce, 2018 ).
This research has several implications for future practice. It highlights the need for training of health workers to include reflection on gender norms and personal values, how to avoid blaming the victim, knowing the range of formal and informal support available locally and nationally, providing information rather than giving ‘advice’, listening to what the woman wants, and strengthening her family and community support system. It also highlights the need for guidelines that recognise the inherent gender and power imbalance within families and provides health workers with practical ideas on how they can engage with perpetrators and families to empower survivors, while also prioritising the needs and rights of individual women and children who are being abused. Midwives in this study highlighted what a difficult balance this can be and that it is more likely to be achieved through policies that take a systematic approach to community engagement and increase the connection between formal and informal systems of support.

Section: 11. Limitations

Interviews were conducted in three of the 13 municipalities of Timor-Leste. Two of the municipalities were the largest and most urbanised in the country. The situation for midwives in very remote and isolated parts of the country may be very different and is more likely to reflect the situation of midwives in Liquica who were less likely to have received training or to have identified women who had experienced abuse. This is concerning given the high percentage of women in Liquica who reported experiencing physical violence in pregnancy ( Table 1 , NSD et al. 2010 ).
As the main providers of maternal and reproductive health services in Timor-Leste, we explored the perspectives of midwives and all were women. Men and other types of health providers may express different views. For example, research in South Africa found male nurses were less likely than female nurses to report they would listen to the woman's side of the story or provide a counselling role ( Kim and Motsei, 2002 ). This research asked midwives to reflect on their practices and did not record actual consultations. Participants may report more positive practices than they actually carry out or minimise their negative reactions. Therefore, women may be experiencing care differently to that which midwives report. In addition, the midwives we spoke with tended to be more experienced, so the knowledge and capacity of midwives generally is likely to be lower than the stories gathered as part of this research. This contributes to the urgency in training midwives in rural and remote areas and supporting them through an effective health systems and community approach.

Section: 12. Conclusion

Midwives engaging with survivors of domestic and sexual violence often focus on individual clinical care and counselling, with some taking a more proactive role garnering support for women within families and communities. The collectivist culture in Timor-Leste means midwives (as health professionals and members of their own communities) must find a balance between protecting individual autonomy and fostering family and community support. The way midwives move between engaging with formal and informal sectors indicates a need to invest in all areas, not just formal services. There are strengths and limitations of both customary and national law, and we argue that health providers should facilitate access to formal services as well as resources in informal spaces in order to promote security from ‘above’ and ‘below’. The current focus on a health systems approach including training, guidelines and policies for responding to domestic and sexual violence is vital, however, we need to know more about how to support health services to deal with perpetrators and families, how to support managers and policy-makers in leadership roles, and how to strengthen the relationship between the health system and community to increase safety and protection for women and children, particularly those in remote and isolated areas.

Section: Author contribution statement

Kayli Wild: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Funding acquisition; Investigation; Project administration; Validation; Writing - original draft; Writing - review & editing. Lidia Gomes: Conceptualization; Project administration; Supervision; Validation; Writing - review & editing. Angelina Fernandes: Data curation; Writing - review & editing. Guilhermina de Araujo: Data curation; Writing - review & editing. Susan McDonald: Conceptualization; Funding acquisition; Supervision; Writing - review & editing. Angela Taft: Conceptualization; Funding acquisition; Supervision; Writing - review & editing.

Section: Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the midwives and community participants who openly shared their challenges and aspirations in addressing domestic violence in their clinic and their communities. Thank you to Livio da Conceicao Matos and Isabelita Madeira who assisted with data collection. Thank you to Elisabeth Jackson for comments and editing on an earlier draft. This research and the lead author were funded by the Australian Research Council (Discovery Early Career Research Award DE17010454 ) and La Trobe University (RFA Transforming Human Societies research grant).
