Title: Reducing the burdens of forced abortion travel: Referrals, financial and emotional support, and opportunities for positive experiences in traveling for third-trimester abortion care


Abstract: Abstract

In the United States, travel is a fact of the abortion care provision landscape. This is largely due to the uneven geographical distribution of providers and state-level gestational duration bans that constrain what abortion care is available locally. When abortion travel is compelled by legal restriction, it is forced travel. Research has comprehensively documented that forced abortion travel is burdensome; people who must travel for abortion experience financial, logistical, and emotional burdens. Generally overlooked, however, is variation in the experience of travel-related burdens and whether and how such burdens can be reduced. Given current political hostility to abortion, the number of people who must travel and the distances they must travel for abortion are likely to grow, making the question of how travel-related burdens can be reduced in the absence of policy change of increasing relevance. Using thematic analysis of semi-structured interviews with 30 cisgender women in the United States who were forced to travel to obtain third-trimester abortion care, I identify three ways that the burdens of forced abortion travel can be mitigated without policy change: prompt referrals; financial and practical support for travel; and emotional support. In some instances, respondents experienced the received emotional support as so valuable as to offset the other burdens of travel, pointing to the possibility that some people might prefer to travel for abortion care whether or not they are forced to do so. Respondents also reported unexpected positive aspects of traveling, including experiences of kindness and human connection, underscoring that not all aspects of abortion travel are negative. Findings thicken our understanding of forced abortion travel and identify structural and interpersonal practices that can reduce the associated burdens, complementing legal and policy-oriented critiques of legal regulation that makes abortion travel necessary.

Section: 1. Introduction

Abortion travel is a fact of the abortion care provision landscape ( Barr-Walker et al., 2019 ), particularly in the United States (U.S.) ( Smith et al., 2021 ). Most abortion care in the U.S. is provided in standalone, outpatient clinics ( Jones et al., 2019 ), and these clinics are not evenly distributed geographically ( Bearak, Burke and Jones, 2017 ; Cartwright et al., 2018 ), which means that many people seeking an abortion must traverse substantial distances to obtain care. In addition to uneven geographic distribution, state-level gestational duration-based bans constrain what abortion care is available locally. People seeking abortion care after gestational duration limits must travel to facilities, often out-of-state, with later limits. As of September 1, 2021, Texas prohibited abortions after fetal cardiac activity is detectible, which occurs in pregnancy at approximately six weeks after the last menstrual period , dramatically increasing the number of people who have to travel out of Texas in order to obtain abortion care ( Associated Press, 2021 ). The U.S. Supreme Court initially allowed Texas's law to stand, and many anticipate that the court will soon allow even more expansive state-level restrictions on abortion that will further increase the number of people who must travel and the distances they must travel for abortion ( Howe, 2021 ; Myers et al., 2019 ).
Yet, although “abortion travel” is measured and explored regularly in the social science literature, it is not consistently defined ( Barr-Walker et al., 2019 ). It is variously defined empirically (e.g., as distance traveled), subjectively (e.g., based on the experience of burdens), or by context (e.g., when motivated by legal restriction or service unavailability). Still, across conceptualizations, in their systematic review of the literature, Barr-Walker et al. (2019) find robust evidence that abortion travel entails financial and logistical burdens, including planning and paying for accommodations, gas, and other transportation as well as in terms of time away from work and/or childcare. Abortion travel compelled by legal restriction may also entail emotional costs: the experience of travel itself or even the idea of having to travel can be emotionally traumatic ( Aiken et al., 2018 ; Broussard, 2020 ; Freeman, 2017 ) and inspire additional feelings of shame and stigma ( Aiken et al., 2018 ). Studying abortion travel from Ireland where abortion was illegal, Murray and Khan (2020) argue that even when abortion care provision abroad was hospitable, the fact that people had to travel to obtain it made the overall abortion experience inhospitable.
To the extent that the literature has identified primarily negative elements of abortion travel, however, we may be overlooking aspects of individuals’ abortion travel experience: What if not all aspects of abortion travel—even when compelled by legal restriction—are negative? What if (at least some of) any burdens of abortion travel can be reduced? After all, the costs of abortion travel vary, and there are surely practices that reduce at least some of the associated burdens. Likewise, there may be opportunities for positive experiences of human connection, kindness, and non-judgment in abortion travel, even alongside the costs it exacts.
To be clear, examining how the burdens of abortion travel can be reduced does not diminish the fact that travel is often burdensome. And when travel is compelled because of legal restriction, such travel represents the denial of full reproductive citizenship to some bodies, namely bodies with the capacity for pregnancy ( Ona Singer, 2020 ). Nonetheless, considering whether and how the lived experience of abortion travel can be improved and the possibilities for positive elements of travel can expand our understanding of abortion travel. It may also identify opportunities for practical support of pregnant people traveling for abortion care, which takes on increased importance given the recent and predicted rise in the number of pregnant people in the U.S. forced to travel for abortion care ( Associated Press, 2021 ; Howe, 2021 ; Myers et al., 2019 ).
Here, I examine whether and how the logistical, financial, and emotional burdens of abortion travel can be mitigated for people who travel for abortion care because of legal restriction. I describe this form of travel as “forced abortion travel” to distinguish it from travel that may have other motivations (e.g., seeking trusted care providers, Heymann et al., 2021 ). I use the case of third-trimester abortion care, drawing on semi-structured interviews with 30 cisgender women in the U.S. who obtained a third-trimester abortion. Third-trimester abortion represents a useful case for this investigation because it almost invariably requires travel, and that travel is compelled by legal restriction. Forty-three states ban abortion after a specific gestational duration, most after twenty-four weeks’ post-fertilization, some as early as twenty weeks post-fertilization, and one state as early as four weeks post-fertilization (usually with a handful of exceptions) ( Guttmacher Institute, 2021 ). In addition, third-trimester abortion is typically a multi-day, outpatient procedure, meaning that third-trimester abortion patients must spend extended time in their destination, not all or even most of which is in a healthcare facility, with the attendant logistical and financial costs associated with that duration.
I identify three ways that the burdens of abortion travel were mitigated for respondents: prompt referrals; financial and practical support; and emotional support. In some instances, respondents experienced the received emotional support as so valuable as to offset the other burdens of travel. Respondents also reported unexpected positive aspects of traveling, including experiences of kindness and human connection, underscoring that not all aspects of abortion travel are negative. Findings thicken our understanding of forced abortion travel and identify structural and interpersonal practices that can reduce the associated burdens, complementing legal and policy-oriented critiques of legal regulation that makes abortion travel necessary.

Section: 2. Methods

Between September 2016 and June 2018, I interviewed 30 women who traveled across state borders to obtain an abortion after the 24th week of pregnancy. Respondents were recruited through three mechanisms. First, from September 2016 through June 2017, clinic personnel at three abortion facilities in the Southeast gave pregnant people who presented for abortion beyond the facility's gestational limit a study flyer inviting them to participate in a phone interview about their experience of being turned away. The flyer listed a toll-free phone number to call for more information and to enroll in the study. Second, starting in fall 2017, I partnered with a clinic that offers third-trimester abortions. They allowed me to have a local research assistant present a one-page flyer to their third-trimester abortion patients, inviting them to participate in a phone interview about their experience of seeking and obtaining a third-trimester abortion. Patients who expressed immediate interest in participating were invited to use the research assistant's cell phone to call me right then, as they were not permitted to have their own cell phones in clinic examination spaces due to privacy concerns. Patients who wanted to consider the opportunity further took the flyer with them. Third, starting in January 2018, I shared the abortion clinic flyer with professional contacts with connections to networks of people who had abortions for pregnancies that were initially wanted. My contacts had previously disclosed that many members of these networks had abortions later in pregnancy, including in the third trimester of pregnancy. These contacts shared the flyer with several private online support groups, and interested potential participants called me on the toll-free number listed. To encourage potential participants to call and learn more about the study, I offered an incentive of a $10 gift card to a major retailer for calling, regardless of eligibility determination.
When interested potential interviewees called the study phone line, I described the study and answered any questions. All callers expressed interest in participating after this initial conversation. I then screened them for eligibility, confirming that they were over 18 years of age, were comfortable speaking in English, and sought an abortion after 24 weeks of pregnancy. Only one caller was not eligible; her abortion was at 22 weeks of pregnancy. All eligible callers agreed to participate in an interview. For these eligible and interested callers, I completed a verbal consenting process and collected their contact information in a secure database. I then scheduled a phone interview for a future time that was convenient to the caller and, for respondents who had obtained an abortion, was at least three weeks after the abortion, so as to allow participants time to reflect on their experience. (Not all interviewees obtained an abortion; some of the women recruited through mechanism 1, who were turned away from clinics in the Southeast, continued their pregnancies [N = 5]. The analysis below is restricted to the respondents who obtained an abortion.) I sent reminders to participants one week and one day before the scheduled interview via the method they requested (text, phone call, or email).
Interviews were semi-structured and utilized a modified version of the timeline interview methodology ( de Vries et al., 2016 ). After collecting general background information, I invited respondents to tell the story of their experience seeking an abortion in whatever way made sense to them, including any points in their life that they thought of as consequential. This approach allowed respondents to identify moments that were meaningful to them, rather than according to an a priori understanding of key points in people's reproductive experiences and pregnancy decision making. I employed this approach with the recognition that people's memories do not always operate linearly. Moreover, the meaning of certain life experiences can depend on other life experiences that both preceded and followed the focal experience ( de Vries et al., 2016 ). A handful of respondents were not comfortable launching into their story right away. For those interviews, I started with a general question about when they first realized they were pregnant. After they answered, I prompted them to continue to tell their story, asking open-ended questions such as “and then what?” After interviewees shared their story as made sense to them, I followed up with questions to flesh out their salient experiences (as they identified them) and the meaning(s) they assigned to these experiences. Of relevance to this analysis, by the end of the interview, I aimed to capture the respondent's experience of abortion care-related travel and of any burdens or positive aspects of abortion travel.
With permission from respondents, all interviews were audio recorded. They ranged in length from just under 1 h to nearly 3 h, averaging about 100 min. I took detailed notes during and after each interview. Respondents were remunerated for their time in the interview with a $50 gift card to a major retailer, mailed immediately after the interview. Study protocols were approved by the University of California, San Francisco's Institutional Review Board.
I fielded calls from interested participants who had the flyer through the end of June 2018. At that point, I had interviewed 35 respondents and experienced the interviews to be very rich. I also experienced the interviews, as a collection, to be emotionally intense, highlighting for me the emotion work involved in conducting research on sensitive topics ( Dickson-Swift et al., 2009 ). I found it increasingly difficult to manage my emotions during interviews and was concerned that this would both compromise the quality of the interviews and represent an inappropriate experience for the interviewees, not to mention represent a personal risk to my emotional health ( Dickson-Swift et al., 2008 ). Given the richness of the interviews already completed, I decided to close recruitment.

Section: 3. Analysis

Interviews were transcribed verbatim by a professional transcriptionist. I analyzed the transcripts using thematic coding, inductively and iteratively coding for any discussion of travel. In this initial round of coding, I defined travel expansively as any discussion of how the respondent got to a healthcare provider, including prenatal care providers and abortion care providers. I then sorted all identified excerpts by destination, homing in on excerpts related to physically getting to and from a third-trimester care provider. I subcoded excerpts related to travel for third-trimester care using grounded theory methods, with financial, logistical, and emotional burdens as sensitizing concepts ( Charmaz, 2006 ). I considered coding complete when no new codes emerged. Through constant comparison, I identified themes of how these burdens varied across respondents and contributors to their reduction. Below, results are organized around major obstacles or burdens incurred by forced abortion travel.

Section: 4. Sample characteristics

The sample analyzed here consists of interviews with 30 cisgender women who ranged in age from 18 to 43 who obtained a third-trimester abortion. Twenty identified as white, five as Hispanic or Latina, three as Black or African American, one as Asian, and one as biracial (Asian and white). They reported a range of educational attainment: two ended their formal education during high school, one was a current high school student, five had completed high school, three had completed some college or an associate's degree, three were current college students, seven had graduated from a four-year college, six held master's degrees, and three had earned doctorates. Fourteen considered themselves religious or spiritual, identifying as Catholic, Christian, Methodist, Jewish, Hindu, and fundamentalist Christian. While most respondents described themselves as able to meet their basic financial needs, nine were unemployed at the time of their abortion, including one who was homeless. They traveled from 14 different U.S. states and obtained their care at five different facilities. Eleven drove from their home to the facility with travel durations ranging from 9 h each way to two days each way. Three drove multiple hours to an airport (2 h, 2 h, and 3 h, respectively) and then flew to their facility (2.5-h, 4.5-h, and 6-h flight times, respectively), repeating these travel times for their return. Sixteen drove less than 1 h to an airport and flew with flight time durations ranging from approximately 2 h to approximately 6 h, repeating these flight times for their return. (Flight times do not include time spent in layovers.) All respondents who flew drove less than 1 h each way between the destination airport and their facility.
Most sought abortion care during the third trimester because they received new information about the pregnancy—including that they were pregnant—that led them, often in consultation with loved ones, to determine that this was not, or was no longer, a pregnancy they wanted to continue. A substantial minority had determined they wanted an abortion earlier in pregnancy but had been unable to obtain an abortion when they wanted it because of policy restrictions that operated as barriers to care. For the purposes of this analysis, I do not review their abortion decision making; in the portions of their accounts I analyze below, they had already decided to terminate their pregnancy and were certain of this decision.
Although most respondents obtained their abortion within the last year, six had obtained their abortion more than one year prior, with eight years the longest time reported since abortion. At the time of their abortion, their gestational duration ranged from 24 weeks to 35 weeks. Thirteen respondents were already parenting children when they obtained their third-trimester abortion. All names below are pseudonyms. To protect confidentiality of respondents, reported ages are age at the time of the interview.

Section: 5. Results

Respondents enumerated many costs associated with having to travel for abortion care, including financial, logistical, and emotional costs. These costs represented significant burdens for every respondent; none of them started out preferring to travel to obtain the abortion they needed. Nonetheless, embedded in many of their accounts were examples of ways the difficulty of surmounting these costs was mitigated by other people, both people they knew and strangers, and of occasions where others missed or actively refused opportunities to help. Collectively, these women's experiences of traveling for third-trimester abortion care offer insight into how the burdens of abortion travel can be reduced, even as abortion travel continues to entail substantial costs.
One of the first hurdles respondents had to overcome to obtain an abortion was to find a provider. Every respondent had or found a healthcare provider—either a prenatal care provider or an abortion provider—when they initially desired an abortion. And in each instance, their initial provider denied them care. This was usually because of state laws prohibiting abortion after a specified duration of pregnancy. While these state bans had exceptions, respondents' circumstances did not fall within them. In a small number of cases, respondents were denied an abortion by their prenatal care provider because the physician or ethics committee in charge declined to approve the abortion, despite legal allowability. Faced with these denials, respondents had no alternative plan; they had an information gap in obtaining third-trimester abortion care. As Carrie, a 33-year-old white woman in the South, described saying to a nurse after she was denied an abortion, “‘Where do I go? I don't even know how to start to find some place.’” What happened next could make it easier for respondents to find an alternate provider who could and would care for them.
Having to go to a different provider was easier for respondents whose current health care provider provided a referral. The extensiveness of this referral varied, but it was its existence that was most consequential. A referral meant respondents did not have to scramble to find a third-trimester abortion provider. At one end of the spectrum, some respondents’ current provider facilitated a referral by contacting the third-trimester provider in advance and, in several instances, sending medical records ahead to the third-trimester clinic. Alexandra, a 33-year-old white woman in the Northeast, explained that when she and her husband communicated to their prenatal care team that they wanted an abortion, “they facilitated [our appointment]. I had to talk to them [the third-trimester provider] at the very end, but they [my prenatal team] called them, they got us the number, they faxed our records. They made it happen.” As another example, the abortion clinic that could not provide Britany, a 27-year-old Black woman in the South, with care not only referred her to a clinic that could but also sent her blood work and ultrasound to that clinic, saving Britany a step in the appointment-making process. Such facilitated referrals ameliorated a fundamental burden of forced abortion travel: figuring out where to go.
Less involved referrals could resolve the information gap precipitated by abortion denial, too, and alleviate some of the difficulty of forced abortion travel. The referrals could be little more than giving respondents a clinic name. When Rachel, a 46-year-old white woman in the South, and her husband told their doctors they wanted to seek an abortion, “they [the doctors] were scrambling. They literally printed off [the clinic's] paperwork from the website to give to me.” Carrie, who above described having no idea what to do when her provider had to turn her away, related that when she walked out of the exam room, the nurse “hands me a sticky and it said [the name of the third-trimester clinic].” Yet respondents deeply appreciated even these minimal referrals. As Megan, a 23-year-old white woman in the South, explained, she felt that the abortion provider that turned her away partially made up for that denial by giving her contact information for other clinics that could care for her. She said, “I'm glad I went [to the clinic that denied me]. […] it was helpful […] I wouldn't have known about these other clinics. I would have just thought, okay then, that was my last chance.” In these instances, a single sheet of paper—or even a post-it—with contact information mitigated the abortion travel-associated challenge of finding a provider.
Not all respondents received timely and comprehensive referrals to care from their prenatal or abortion provider. The experiences of the remaining handful of respondents who were not referred to third-trimester care illustrate how the failure to refer exacerbated the burdens of forced abortion travel—or at least missed opportunities to reduce those burdens. Cristina, an 18-year-old Hispanic woman in the South, was turned away from an abortion clinic without a referral elsewhere. She explained that “just having the knowledge of knowing about abortion and knowing about all these clinics was difficult.” Respondents—or someone in their lives—had to have the tenacity and imagination to seek information about third-trimester abortion. Cristina detailed the difficulty of finding a third-trimester provider online, and how much perseverance it took: For me, that experience was really hard. I searched for nights, and I didn't find anything I needed. Anything. It was just articles about it, but there were no clinics, and I needed a clinic. I didn't need articles. That was very frustrating for me.
Cristina was fearful of being judged, she explained, and so initially did not disclose her need for abortion to anyone. Eventually, she told her brother, and he was able to find a provider through online research. As Cristina said, “if it wasn't for my brother, I don't know how I would have ever found that [clinic].” A referral from the abortion provider who was unable to provide care for her would have decreased the anxiety Cristina experienced—and saved her days and perhaps up to a week of time spent searching for an alternate provider. It also potentially would have afforded Cristina the privacy not to disclose her need for abortion to others.
Once respondents identified a(n out-of-state) provider, the next challenge of their abortion travel was figuring out how to get there. They had to navigate the logistics of travel, including transportation, food, and accommodations—and they had to figure out how to pay for it. Some of these costs were higher than they might have been if respondents had been able to make purchases farther in advance. As Amy, a 40-year-old white woman in the Northeast, noted, “because we had to book the airline tickets for the next day, they were very inflated.” Carrie described her initial calculations about the cost of travel, saying, Who would care for our child? We have two dogs. Would we put them in the kennel? Because that's $30 a night? It was like everything just got compounded over and over. […] Then you have to pay for a hotel. You have to arrange for gas. It wasn't like we could even stay in our own home.
There were, thus, both financial and logistical burdens tied up in navigating forced abortion travel. Respondents recounted, however, several ways that covering these staggering costs were made manageable for them.
Most respondents covered at least part of these costs through their own savings and the financial support of their personal and familial networks. They told of cashing out their savings, pulling from their retirement accounts, and seeking personal loans. They told of the unexpected generosity of friends and family members who gave them money, put expensive last-minute flight purchases on their credit cards, lent cars, gave rides to the airport, took care of their dogs, and provided childcare to their children while they traveled.
Sixteen respondents also relied on financial support from local and national abortion funds to afford travel. Abortion funds are non-profit organizations that help people defray the costs of abortion. Respondents who relied on them were financially struggling, as were the people in their social networks; they did not have anyone they could turn to for money. Britany reported that an abortion fund “paid for my travel and they paid for my hotel for the week, so I got to get the hotel for a week, which was like 2 min away from the place [clinic]. So that was great. I guess the funding thing really helped out a lot.” Isabella, a 24-year-old Hispanic woman in the South, was given a grant for gas money and food from a local fund. The same was true for Victoria, a 26-year-old white woman in the South. As she explained, “the funding place actually helped me with travel and lodging as well. Like, it wouldn't have gotten done if, you know, those organizations weren't there.” In other cases, even though the fund(s) did not directly pay for the respondent's travel, they did so indirectly, increasing their coverage of the procedure and thereby reducing the respondent's portion of the procedure cost based on their travel costs. Camryn, a 30-year-old Black woman in the South, for example, explained that the fund she worked with “deducted the money that I had [spent] for the flight, they added that back to the procedure [coverage].” The procedure coverage was sent directly to the provider. This support was essential to Camryn's ability to obtain an abortion.
Some funds also connected respondents to local volunteers who hosted respondents in their homes and provided rides to and from the clinic. For example, one abortion fund that helped Julie, a 43-year-old white woman in the South, set her up with a volunteer host who opened her home to Julie and her husband for free. Julie and her husband were grateful for the saved cost of accommodations as well as for the unexpected kindness it represented. Julie explained, “I think it's incredible because she [the host] didn't know us from Adam. We could have been serial killers. And she's a single lady and she just welcomed us into her home and handed us a house key.” With fund volunteers like the one who shared her home with Julie and her husband, the burdens of travel were reduced and made manageable. Veronica, a 21-year-old Hispanic woman in the West, had a similar experience of kindness from a stranger, explaining, “they set me up with a woman. She was an amazing person, and she would drive me. She let me stay at her house. She fed me, and it was a really great experience. It made it really easy.” She later elaborated on her host's unforeseen kindness, saying, “I made a lifelong friend in the woman that I met who housed me.” The practical support from the abortion fund, in other words, mattered for managing both the travel costs and logistics of obtaining a third-trimester abortion—and it sometimes offered respondents an opportunity to experience human connection and kindness.
Broadly, respondents were deeply grateful for the travel support the funds gave them. Autumn said, “I don't think I could have said ‘thank you’ enough to everyone.” But even as the support that funds gave respondents was integral to their ability to travel for abortion, they were not always easy to navigate—or to find. Most respondents learned of the existence of funds from either the provider who turned them away or from the third-trimester clinic when they called to make an appointment. Isabella, for example, explained that her doctor gave her information on local and national abortion funds at the same time as she gave information about third-trimester providers. Caroline, a 23-year-old white woman in the South, received a list of fund phone numbers from the counselor at the third-trimester clinic when she made her appointment. As she explained, “It was really helpful because finding online, I wouldn't have known who services who. There's definitely regional ones as opposed to national ones, and stuff like that.”
Accessing the resources of these mostly volunteer-run funds was typically stressful, exhausting, and time-consuming. This represented a different kind of burden of forced abortion travel, one that specifically accrued to those with fewer financial resources (and whose social networks were also financially struggling). Respondents who relied on funds to overcome the financial burdens of abortion travel incurred time costs. Autumn spent a week calling different funds to get help, both for her travel and for the procedure costs. Several respondents described getting busy signals over and over again, waking up early or staying up late to try to get through on a fund hotline. Laura described how some funds would refer her to other funds. She explained, I kept calling those funds, and those funds kept giving me information for other funds. So, it was like, oh, you got information from these people. Let me give you information for these people. So, it was like six degrees of separation sort of situation.
Caroline called so many funds, she could not recall during our interview which ones had been able to help her and with which part(s) of her travel.
There were also emotional burdens, largely in the form of stress, related to relying on funds. Victoria had no car or access to a car. She needed to fly to her destination clinic but could not afford the cost of a flight. Victoria called two funds every day leading up to her abortion appointment, worried that she would not be able to secure the funding to pay for a flight in time. She explained, I would call [one fund and] they would call back saying that they were already, you know, out of funds, which I understood. I would never, you know, get angry with them, but it was just frustrating. And then, that one shut down temporarily until, you know, the beginning of this year. It was scheduled for a shut down. So, then I was only working with one.
Because the funds she called were staffed by volunteers, Victoria was not able to ever reach someone directly. She had to leave a message and wait for a call back, as she said, “whenever they have the time, which takes time, you know, in itself.” The waiting was stressful.
Talking with fund volunteers and staffers, too, required a level of disclosure that was uncomfortable for some respondents. After explaining earlier in the interview her preference to keep most personal information private, Isabella described the questions the funds asked her as “very personal.” Still, she answered them, she said, because she needed gas money and money for a hotel stay. She explained, I was just trying to get the funding, so I was just like, honestly, I don't know them. They don't know me. They don't know who I am, so it doesn't matter. At that point, I was just like, I need the money. I don't care. I would do whatever. I just wanted to get this done with. I needed the help and they were going to help me.
As the accounts of respondents who gratefully accepted financial and practical travel support from abortion funds demonstrate, while the abortion funds reduced some of the burdens of forced abortion travel, they were not a panacea. Securing fund support entailed different logistical and emotional burdens.
In addition to information gaps and logistical and financial burdens, forced abortion travel could exact emotional costs—and respondents described several ways that those burdens were reduced. Respondents reported that at the point of initial denial of abortion, whether from an abortion or prenatal provider, providers' expressions of sympathy and kindness in both denying them abortions and referring them elsewhere could lessen the emotional burdens of travel, particularly of feeling that the care they sought was stigmatized. As Alexandra said, “it does validate me ethically that [my doctors] agreed this was a valid option […] that it was illegal for them to do it, but they knew who they could send me to for it.” For Autumn, a 22-year-old white woman in the West, after telling her they were legally prohibited from providing her with an abortion, her nurses invited her to call later abortion providers right then. She recounted, “they gave me all the information and they're like, ‘Well, do you want to call here? Because we can help you through the phone call and everything like that.’” Autumn was amazed at their expressions of sympathy. She said, “They were just really supportive, which I didn't expect. […] I don't think they could have done anything better.” Laura, a 26-year-old white woman in the South, too, described feeling shocked when she learned she was too far along in pregnancy to have an abortion in her state. She felt unmoored. She recounted how the abortion clinic's medical director talked to her in a calm and professional way about how they could refer her for care out-of-state. She said, “They gave me all the information [for third-trimester abortion providers] and basically said, ‘if you need anything, please give us a call. Ultimately, hopefully this will be okay.’ Basically, just stating like, ‘we're here for you. We just can't do anything for you.’” Their kindness helped her feel less panicked, which lessened the emotional burdens of abortion denial and subsequent forced abortion travel.
The importance of kindness and sympathy in abortion denial is further evident in the accounts of respondents who received perfunctory referrals that were lacking in expressions of emotional support. The abortion provider who turned away Jessica, a 31-year-old white woman in the Midwest, gave her a referral but did so in a way Jessica found rude. She said, “she [the nurse] printed it off and she said, ‘Well, here you go. We can't. You're going to have to go somewhere else.’ So, it was really actually the rudest way she could have told me, I think. I think somebody else other than me would have broken down at that point because I wanted to. […] So I just walked out because I didn't know what else to do.” Caroline similarly explained that, although the abortion clinic offered her a referral to third-trimester care, “I was really unhappy with [the clinic] because they were really brisk and informal.” Caroline found the abortion clinic who turned her away broadly unhelpful because clinic personnel did not convey emotional support for the denial, even though they referred her to a third-trimester provider.
Respondents also described practices at their third-trimester abortion clinics that alleviated some of the emotional burdens of forced abortion travel, including the burden of feeling alone in their need to travel for abortion care. At Julie's clinic, there was one staff person assigned to her and with her throughout her visit. This helped Julie feel supported. She said, “They did everything they could to make you feel good, safe, and secure and as familiar as possible.” Group counseling sessions in which other patients shared their stories, including of having to travel, helped other respondents feel less alone. Britany explained, “There was a couple people there from [my home state], so it was like that was a lot easier. And they were doing the same thing I was doing, just because it was too far along so they had to come there. That made it a lot, like, easier just because I'm not the only one that drove all the way here.” Staff attention and opportunities to connect with other patients helped many respondents overcome some of the emotional strain of forced abortion travel.
Interactions with people outside the clinic who expressed non-judgment about their abortion eased the emotional strain of travel, too. For Olivia, a 25-year-old white woman in the South, someone entirely uninvolved in abortion care offered her emotional support that soothed some of her emotional distress: her Uber driver. Early in her interview, Olivia described internalized abortion stigma, knowing that abortion was the right choice but feeling that others would judge her harshly for her choice. Having to travel hundreds of miles for abortion care exacerbated her feeling that she was doing something wrong. She explained, “I flew up to [the clinic city] by myself. I was in a hotel by myself. I did everything by myself. […] Going to the clinic was scary, but I emotionally had a lot of feelings just thinking was this the right thing?” In her Uber drive to the clinic, the driver asked her if she was going to get an abortion. She responded affirmatively and anticipated negative judgment. Then, she related, And he was like, “Oh, no, it's okay. Don't be upset, don't be scared. If you're not ready, you're not ready. Don't feel bad.” […] And it was just such a sweet thing to say, and such a nice way to think about it, and it was just amazing that I had that conversation.
Olivia's account illustrates how non-judgment, even from a stranger, could make a positive impact on respondents as they navigated the stress of abortion travel.
The interviews also pointed to ways that exceptional emotional support could create unexpected opportunities for positive experiences during forced abortion travel. Eliza, a 36-year-old white woman in the Northeast, marveled at how, at the clinic she visited, they're just so unapologetically like pro-woman. It's like empowering. Like I didn't realize how much internalized sexism I had in myself until I went [there]. Like it allowed me to see like a lot of my own blind spots. So, in a way it's like, as crazy as it is, it was like empowering to go there.
Others underscored the value of the emotional support and overt non-judgment from clinic staff. Cristina felt that the care she received out-of-state was ultimately more supportive than anything she could have received in her home state. She said, I felt like she [the clinic staffer] wasn't judging me—the person I was talking to—she was just very understanding […] she just made me feel like I finally had someone on my side that I could have support from. She told me that they didn't judge anyone, that they were going to be with me through the whole procedure. It just finally felt okay, you know? Before this, having the thought of having the abortion, I felt like everyone was against me.
For respondents like Cristina, who experienced sustained interpersonal hostility to abortion in her home state, experiencing non-judgment from her clinic contact was revolutionary—and it was something, she felt, she would not have experienced without traveling.
The importance of the emotional support for abortion respondents received at their out-of-state clinic is hard to understate. When asked whether they would have preferred not to travel for their abortion care, all agreed that they would have preferred to stay in their home state. However, when offered the same hypothetical with the caveat that the home-state care would be safe and legal but not include the emotional support they received out-of-state, most said they would have preferred to travel. Haley, an 18-year-old white woman in the South, explained this preference, saying, “some people wouldn't look at it [traveling for abortion care] as a positive experience, but I absolutely do because not only do they help me through that, but they changed my life in ways that they could never understand. […] I really am thankful for them. So, no, I would not trade that for the world.” Indeed, elsewhere during the interview, Haley reported that she had considered self-harm when she was turned away from the nearby abortion clinic, ashamed both of being pregnant and of wanting an abortion. The non-judgmental care and emotional support she received from the clinic staff reset those feelings of shame. She stated, “they saved my life, they definitely did. If it wasn't for them, I probably wouldn't be here.”
Still, for others, travel was so stressful that they would have foregone the emotional and non-judgmental support the out-of-state clinic offered for care nearby. Britany explained this preference, saying, “because [travel] is like a big thing to me and being aware of my surroundings.” Caroline was less resolute about the hypothetical trade of emotional support for not having to travel, but ultimately cited the saved financial cost of not having to travel as more important to her than emotional support. For these respondents, exceptional emotional support could reduce but never entirely offset the other burdens of abortion travel.

Section: 6. Discussion

Travel is a necessity for many people seeking abortion care in the U.S. and entails logistical, financial, and emotional burdens ( Barr-Walker et al., 2019 ). In the specific case of third-trimester abortion, many of the burdens the women I interviewed faced could be erased with policy change. For example, without gestational age bans, many respondents would not have been forced to travel for care, eliminating the financial, logistical, and emotional costs of travel. (Of course, the presence and willingness of skilled providers ( Freedman, 2010 ) could still represent complications, but these complications would not be rooted in state or federal policy.) In the absence of policy change, however, this analysis identifies structural and interpersonal responses to forced abortion travel that can mitigate some of the burdens for at least some people seeking third-trimester abortion care.
One way these burdens were reduced for respondents was through timely referrals to a third-trimester abortion provider. Respondents, like others seeking abortion care, faced an information gap in knowing where to go ( Kavanaugh et al., 2019 ). Although respondents appreciated more involved referrals, the simple fact of a referral was most consequential to easing the information gap they faced. These findings illustrate Zurek et al.’s (2015) contention that efforts to improve abortion referrals can make a difference for pregnant people seeking abortion. Currently, a substantial minority of obstetrician-gynecologists do not refer to abortion care ( Desai et al., 2018 ), even when a fetus is diagnosed with a lethal anomaly during the third trimester of pregnancy ( Jacobs et al., 2015 ). Changing this practice may mitigate some of the burdens of forced abortion travel (see Zurek et al., 2015 for examples of best practices).
Likewise, funding and practical support were integral to some respondents’ ability to travel for abortion care. For respondents with few financial resources—and with social networks that were similarly financially struggling—non-profit abortion funds were the only way they could overcome financial barriers to abortion travel. Findings echo evidence that abortion funds are important in enabling abortion seekers to afford abortion care and travel throughout pregnancy ( Ely et al., 2017 ; Ely, Hales and Jackson, 2018 ; Ely et al., 2020 ; Leyser-Whalen et al., 2021 ; Rice et al., 2021 ). Streamlining the process of securing funding for travel from abortion funds (e.g., creating a centralized number for local and national funds), increasing awareness of the resource, and increasing the financial resources funds are able to grant can further mitigate the burdens of forced abortion travel for more people who need third-trimester abortion care.
Finally, emotional support, from prenatal and abortion care providers who referred respondents to third-trimester care, clinic staff, and even strangers, could alleviate some of the emotional burdens of forced abortion travel. Overt support for abortion-seekers’ reproductive autonomy and non-judgment of their need to travel for an abortion is something anyone—stranger or loved one—can do. For some respondents, the benefits of the emotional support for abortion they experienced were so substantial as to offset the other burdens they experienced and make them glad they traveled. This suggests that some people might prefer to travel for third-trimester abortion care, whether or not they are forced to do so.
Respondents' accounts not only demonstrated ways in which the financial, logistical, and emotional burdens of forced abortion travel for third-trimester abortion can be reduced, they also revealed positive aspects of their travel—often aspects they did not anticipate—such as experiences of kindness from strangers who opened their homes to respondents. Research on abortion travel has tended to enumerate the burdens and costs of travel ( Barr-Walker et al., 2019 ), rather than the opportunities for human connection and kindness that travel may afford. This represents a gap in the literature that future research should explore, including examining to what extent kindness and connection experienced during travel is distinct from or overlapping with emotional support for abortion and abortion travel. While the women I interviewed discussed the kindness of strangers in the context of practical support from abortion fund volunteers, people forced to travel for third-trimester abortion care could potentially experience pleasure and joy during travel that is unrelated to their abortion. Reagan's (2000) discovery that at least some of the women who traveled from the U.S. to Mexico for abortion care in the 1960s engaged in sightseeing during their trips offers additional support for this possibility.
Although these findings emerge from the experiences of women who traveled for third-trimester abortion care, they may be transferable to people seeking abortion in the first and second trimesters . Forced abortion travel is not unique to third-trimester abortion care ( Bearak, Burke and Jones, 2017 ; Cartwright et al., 2018 ; Smith et al., 2021 ). Further, in 13 states, because of two-visit requirements ( Guttmacher Institute, 2021b ), people seeking an abortion must either stay overnight or make the trip to the clinic more than once to obtain an abortion at any gestational duration, extending the duration of their travel and compounding any associated costs. Indeed, even if policy changes eliminated most need to travel for abortion, abortion travel may still be necessitated by natural disasters ( Leyser-Whalen et al., 2020 ). Practices like prompt referrals, financial and practical support services, and non-judgmental emotional support are likely to have a positive impact on people traveling for abortion care throughout pregnancy.
Still, earlier abortion may afford additional practices to alleviate the burdens of forced abortion travel, including practices that eliminate the need for travel. Aiken et al. (2018) , for example, find that some people seeking abortion in the first trimester without local abortion access chose medication abortion at home so as to avoid having to travel. Outside of the U.S., activists have developed safe-abortion hotlines ( Gill et al., 2021 ; McReynolds-Pérez, 2017 ) and an accompaniment model of abortion provision that operates outside of the healthcare system and can enable people to obtain an abortion without substantial travel ( Zurbriggen et al., 2018 ). These practices may have relevance for understanding additional ways to reduce the burdens of forced abortion travel.
It bears noting that this sample includes many respondents with notable privilege, including class, race, cisgender, and education privilege. People with such privilege may be more likely and better resourced to overcome the burdens of forced abortion travel. That said, the sample also includes women who are among the more marginalized in U.S. society, including a woman who was homeless, showing that the substantial burdens to abortion can be mitigated for people with little social privilege. What this sample cannot address is the experiences of people who desired a third-trimester abortion but for whom the burdens related to travel were insurmountable. Additionally, these data are specific to the U.S. context, which has a unique regulatory structure for abortion, including a patchwork of state-level restrictions and legality of abortion at later gestational durations. Future research should examine what practices can reduce the burdens of forced abortion travel in other contexts.
This analysis emphatically does not argue that forced travel for abortion is just or equitable; people should be able to access safe, affordable, emotionally supportive healthcare without being forced to travel. Nonetheless, by bringing attention to people's lived experiences of forced abortion travel, these findings complement legal and policy-oriented critiques of restrictions that make abortion travel a requirement. They underscore that not all experiences of travel are negative and expand the literature's perspective on abortion travel, opening the opportunity to identify practices that reduce the burdens of forced travel and its possibilities for positive experiences.

Section: Credit statement

Katrina Kimport: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing, funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

I thank Elizabeth Stockton for her research assistance; Jenny Holl, Rebecca Kriz, Heather Lipkovich, Sarah Roberts, and Erin Wingo for their project assistance; Danielle Bessett for brainstorming with me; and Katherine Ehrenreich, Caitlin Gerdts, Heidi Moseson, Shelley Sella, and Mikaela Smith for their feedback on earlier drafts of the manuscript. This analysis would not be possible without the collaboration of the incredible staff at the recruitment facilities and the women who shared their stories with me. Funding for this project came from the Society of Family Planning ( SFPRF 11–06 ) and an anonymous foundation. The sponsors had no involvement in study design; in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to submit the article for publication. The views and opinions expressed are those of the author, and do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of the Society of Family Planning Research Fund or the anonymous foundation.
