Title: Intergenerational transmission of out-of-home care and the role of mental health problems: Findings from Stockholm birth cohort multigenerational study


Abstract: Abstract

Out-of-home care (OHC) experiences are associated with poor long-term outcomes throughout life. However, the continuity of OHC over generations is not fully explored, and the influence of mental health problems (MHP) and socioeconomic conditions on such transmission is still unclear. We therefore assessed the extent to which MHP affect the intergenerational transmissions of OHC as well as whether there are differential patterns depending on the socioeconomic conditions of the family of origin. We used a prospective data from the Stockholm Birth Cohort Multigenerational Study (SBC Multigen) on 11,333 cohort members (Generation 1; G1), their parents (Generation 0; G0), and 24,905 children (Generation 2; G2). Multivariate regressions and path models were used to examine the associations between OHC and MHP across generations; stratified analysis by occupational class in G0 was performed to explore potentially differential patterns. Our findings support the existence of an intergenerational transmission of OHC, particularly in the working class group (OR 4.70); MHP was only transmitted across generations in this group (OR 1.51). While the results indicated a stronger role of MHP among the middle/upper class (OR 5.59) compared to working class (OR 3.52) in part of the pathway (MHP G1→OHC G2), this patter was not consistent throughout the whole pathway (e.g. OHC G1→MHP G1). We conclude that there is a tendency for OHC and MHP experiences to continue across generations, particularly among families with more disadvantageous socioeconomic conditions. MHP seem to play an important role in the transmission of OHC irrespective of socioeconomic conditions.

Section: 1. Introduction

When parents are unable to raise their children or to meet the minimum acceptable standards for their care or even when the child's own behaviour endanger their health and development, it might lead to involvement with child welfare services. In some cases, children are separated from their families and taken into out-of-home care (OHC). OHC is a marker of family instability, frequently (but far from always) characterised by abuse or neglect, and strongly linked to subsequent disadvantageous circumstances ( Brännström et al., 2017 ); individuals with experience of OHC tend to attain lower socioeconomic status, have higher rates of criminal justice system involvement, as well as increased risks of substance use and mental health problems (MHP) ( Gypen et al., 2017 ; Kääriälä and Hiilamo, 2017 ).
It has been estimated that about 1% of European children (around 1 million children) spend time in alternative care in a given year ( Eurochild, 2010 ). The prevalence of OHC in Sweden – the context of this study – is similar to the overall rate in Europe: it has been fairly stable among younger children (since the start of registration in 1968) ( Berlin, 2020 ); teenage placements have increased over the last decades due to changes in the social service regulations and unaccompanied asylum seekers ( Socialstyrelsen. Statisti, 2020 ; lacerad, 2020 ). About 5% among younger adult generations (i.e. born in 1980 or after) and 4% of older generations have spent time in OHC at some time during their upbringing ( Berlin, 2020 ). Those placements can be divided into foster care (including kinship care), residential homes, supported housing, and special homes with secure units ( Socialstyrelsen. Statisti, 2020 ).
It is reasonable to assume that OHC and other adversities might be transmitted across generations. Intergenerational transmission refers to the continuity of individual abilities, traits, behaviours, and social and health outcomes from parents to their children through complex processes that involve genetic and non-genetic factors ( Cavalli Sforza and Feldman, 1973 ; Rutter, 1998 ). Although genetics interact with the environment ( Guintivano and Kaminsky, 2016 ), the high genetic inheritance of some health conditions (e.g. mental disorders such as schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder and bipolar disorder) ( Sullivan et al., 2012 ) must be considered when exploring the potential reasons underlying the transmission of these conditions over generations ( Rutter, 1998 ). According to the few existing studies on intergenerational transmission of OHC, a substantial percentage of OHC alumni's children spend part or all of their childhood in OHC ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ; Pecora et al., 2009 ; Courtney and Prophet, 2011 ; Jackson Foster et al., 2015 ; Armfield et al., 2021 ). A Swedish population-based study found that the risk of being placed in OHC was greater when both parents had spent time in OHC, followed by those who had only one parent had experience of placement, in comparison with children whose parents did not have a history of OHC ( Wall-Wieler et al., 2018a ).
While the underlying processes are not well-elucidated, previous research quantifying the intergenerational transmission of OHC has proposed some potential mechanisms. Psychosocial risks, e.g. social network, neighbourhood context, parental substance use and mental illness, have been recognized as predictors of OHC placements ( Fong, 2017 ; Putnam-Hornstein and Needell, 2011 ; Wall-Wieler et al., 2018b ; English et al., 2015 ). Such risks tend to accumulate with age which might indicate their fundamental role for the transmission of OHC across generations ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ; Pecora et al., 2009 ; Courtney and Prophet, 2011 ; Jackson Foster et al., 2015 ; Wall-Wieler et al., 2018c ; DiPrete and Eirich, 2006 ). Parenting styles also appear to partly contribute to the intergenerational transmission of risk. ( Yang et al., 2018 ; Widom et al., 2015 ). Moreover, there is a variety of theoretical perspectives that have been used to provide a context for understanding the intergenerational continuity of abuse and neglect, which to some extent might apply also to OHC. The frameworks most frequently conferred by researchers are: (I) social learning theory (e.g. children learn how to behave by watching and observing the behaviours of others, particularly, those most salient to them such as parents), (II) attachment theory (e.g. children have an innate need to form an attachment bond with a caregiver and the way it happens might affect future relationships), and (III) trauma-based models (e.g. exposure to maltreatment might interrupt normative psychological development during childhood which might result in greater negative emotionality experiences and inferior emotional regulation throughout life ( Yang et al., 2018 ).
Due to the adverse circumstances, which might even lead to stigmatisation, children in OHC tend to exhibit great mental health need – both while in care and after aging out of care ( Baldwin et al., 2019 ; Hambrick et al., 2016 ; Plant et al., 2018 ; Oswald et al., 2010 ; Zhukova, 2020 ; Bronsard et al., 2016 ; Fusco, 2015 ). This may lead to a subsequent scenario where individuals struggle with mental health issues at the same time as they experience parenthood, creating a potential risk for placements in the next generation ( Kääriälä and Hiilamo, 2017 ; Hambrick et al., 2016 ; Plant et al., 2018 ; Oswald et al., 2010 ; Fusco, 2015 ). For example, research has shown that parents who experience depressive symptoms tend to use less effective parenting practices and are more likely to abuse or neglect their children, potentially feeding the transmission of OHC across generations ( Zhukova, 2020 ). Foster and colleagues ( Jackson Foster et al., 2015 ) explored the intergenerational pathways (i.e. mental and behavioural factors) leading to foster care placement across three generations using data from the US. They found that functioning (i.e. a variable embracing MHP, criminal involvement, and employment status) among first-generation fathers was predictive of their depression, which was in turn associated with less social support in the second generation, and as well as OHC placement in the third generation.
Extensive prior research suggests that children born to parents who are socioeconomically disadvantaged are more likely to be exposed to a constellation of adversities and therefore have increased risks of being placed in OHC ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ; Bywaters et al., 2016 ; Berger, 2011 ; Raissian and Bullinger, 2017 ). Since the experience of OHC in childhood is furthermore associated with subsequent risks of poorer socioeconomic resources in adulthood, this translates into an increased risk of OHC among the alumni's own children. To fully comprehend the intergenerational transmission of OHC, it is therefore important to differentiate the actual OHC experience from the lack of resources among the OHC alumni ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ). Yet, this constellation of adversities that children from the most socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to experience might also reduce the explanatory capacity of MHP for the intergenerational transmission of OHC. Put differently, the transmission of OHC across generations of those from more socioeconomically advantaged backgrounds (i.e. families less prone to experience a syndemic effect of disadvantages) might to a larger extent be explained by MHP, as compared to what might be expected among those who originate from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Drawing on multigenerational register data centred around a Stockholm cohort born in 1953 (Generation 1) as well as their parents (Generation 0) and children (Generation 2), the current study sets out to examine the transmission of OHC ( Fig. 1 (a)) from Generation 1 to Generation 2 and MHP from Generation 0 to Generation 1 ( Fig. 1 (b)). The study stands out from and extends the previous literature in the following ways: a) By examining the role that MHP in Generation 0 and Generation 1 may play for the intergenerational transmission of OHC ( Fig. 1 (c) and (d)), and b) by investigating whether the transmission of OHC as well as the role of MHP for this transmission might look different depending on the socioeconomic living conditions of Generation 0. Other aspects also contribute to the uniqueness of this study. We are using comprehensive prospective data with low attrition in which the individuals' (and their children's) participation in the study does not depend on having OHC experience and/or poor mental health. Yet, our birth cohort sample also includes a large number of individuals with experience of OHC. Moreover, we do not rely on retrospective self-reports or parental reports about experiences of OHC. Considering the high rates of mental health problems among children in OHC and the lack of legislation or a standardised practice for the assessment and monitoring of these children's mental health at care entry ( Vinnerljung and Hjern, 2018 ), we believe that this study can contribute substantially to police and practice by indicating potential entry points for action (e.g. would efforts aimed at individuals with MHP and more unfavourable backgrounds help to break the hypothetical cycle of OHC transmission?), as well as supporting or even refuting strategies currently in place. Download: Download high-res image (358KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Causal diagram of the intergenerational transmission of out-of-home care and the mediating role of mental health problems.

Section: 2. Methods

The data material used was the Stockholm Birth Cohort Multigenerational Study (SBC Multigen) ( Almquist et al., 2019 ), created in 2018/2019 through a probability matching of the Stockholm Metropolitan Study (SMS) and RELINK53, two distinctive longitudinal and anonymised data materials. The SMS includes all individuals who were born in 1953 and lived in the Stockholm metropolitan area (the capital region), in Sweden at age 10 (n = 15,117). RELINK53 is defined as all individuals born in 1953 and residing in Sweden in 1960, 1965 and/or 1968, as well as their relatives' linkages (parents, siblings, children, etc), consisting a total of 2,390,753 individuals with administrative register information currently available between 1953 and 2018. In total, 14,608 cohort members from the SMS were matched with RELINK53 through an algorithm based on variables identical to both data, and could thus be included in the SBC Multigen. These individuals (Generation 1) comprise the “core generation” of the SBC Multigen. Further information from different national register holders about G1's antecedents (Generation 0) and descendants (Generations 2–3) is also included in the SBC Multigen. This study and sequential probability matching have been approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm (no. 2017/34–31/5; 2017/684–32; 2016/481–31/5).
Our study uses information from three generations, centred around the cohort members of SBC Multigen (n = 14,608). Among these cohort members, which in this study are referred to as Generation 1 (G1), 11,338 individuals had at least one child. The children of the cohort members comprise Generation 2 (G2) (n = 24,930). We subsequently removed all placements before 1973 (33 cases), thus overlapping with our measurement of OHC in G1, leading to the exclusion of 25 individuals (G2) and their respective parents (5 individuals from G1) (more details are given further below). This rendered a sample of 24,905 individuals in G2 – which also constitute the main analytical sample used in the current study. Moreover, we have information for the parents of all G1 individuals, here referred to as Generation 0 (G0) (n = 11,333). The information reflects circumstances related to family unit (in other words, G0 includes “parents” rather than mothers and fathers separately).
In Sweden, which is the focus of this study, the pronounced aim of placing children in OHC is to provide them with better opportunities for development than in their birth home. However, children in OHC often come from adverse family backgrounds; many have experiences of child maltreatment and some exhibit early emotional and behavioural problems. Moreover, childhood experience of OHC seems to be one of the strongest markers for compromised long-term health and psychosocial development . That said, in accordance with previous literature ( Brännström et al., 2017 ; Armfield et al., 2021 ; Jackisch et al., 2019 ), we use OHC placements as a marker of childhood adversity.
Information about placement in OHC in G1 was based on the decisions made by the Child Welfare Committee, as recorded in the local Social Registers of Stockholm municipalities. It covers the period between 1953 and 1972 (from birth until the respondent turns 19). In G2, information on OHC placement was obtained through the national Register on Social Services for Children and Youth for the period from 1973 to 2016. Variables indicating placement in OHC were coded as ‘No OHC’ and ‘OHC’ for G1 and G2, respectively.
Information about MHP in G0 was derived from the local Social Registers, covering the period 1953 to 1972. The Social Registers contain records kept by the family and child welfare services, manually collected from the municipalities in the Stockholm region. The original data included information about whether the father/mother had psychiatric problems or suffered from depression, received psychiatric treatment , or committed suicide. For the purpose of the current study, all of the above were seen as indicative of mental health problems.
The Patient Register was used to extract data about MHP in G1 from 1973 to 2016. Here, records of inpatient care (at least one overnight stay at the hospital) with a diagnosis reflecting mental and behavioural disorders (Chapter F in the International Classification of Diseases, 10th revision, as well as the corresponding chapters in the 8th and 9th revisions) were included. Substance use disorders which might have a different aetiology/mechanism and rather reflect behavioural types of disorder; and diseases with strong biological heritage, i.e. often with early onset and with a predominant genetic component, were not included. For both generations, MHP were operationalized as binary variables: ‘Having MHP’ and ‘Not having MHP’.
In order to explore whether the socioeconomic conditions of the family of origin might influence the intergenerational pathways of OHC and mental health problems, we used information about occupational class in G0 which was obtained through the Occupational Register from 1953 (reflecting the occupation of the head of the household, typically the father, at the time of the birth of the G1 member). These data were classified into two categories: ‘Middle/upper class’ (middle class + upper middle/upper class) and ‘Working class’ (working class, skilled + working class, unskilled + unclassified). The ‘working class’ is considered the more socioeconomically disadvantaged group compared to the ‘middle/upper class’ group in our study population.
Sex of G1 and G2 (Male; Female), respectively, were included as covariates.
To examine whether and by how much the intergenerational transmission of OHC is explained by MHP in G0 and G1, we ran multiple logistic regression models adding variables in separate blocks of adjustment, as follows: Model 1: OHC (G2) plus covariates (sex (G1 and G2) and occupational class (G0)); Model 2: Model 1 plus G0 MHP; Model 3: Model 2 plus G1 MHP. Relying on theoretical evidence that socioeconomic conditions might play an important role in OHC, we also carried out stratified analyses by occupational class in G0 in order to test whether the pathways are differentially strong between the middle/upper and working classes. We evaluated the change in odds ratios (OR) by comparing individuals not being placed in OHC with those being placed in OHC calculated as 100 × (OR−adjustedOR)/(OR−1) . Through this, we aim to quantify the magnitude of this association (e.g., transmission of OHC) and verify whether the addition of other variables (e.g. MHP) attenuate this association.
Path models were then estimated to quantify the hypothesised pathways of MHP in the intergenerational transmission of OHC using the generalised structural equation modelling (GSEM; Stata 16.0). This is an approach useful for mapping our understanding of the connections and processes underlying the OHC transmission, which adds more detailed and robust information on the top of the elementary quantification of the association's magnitude/attenuation. Overall, GSEM allows for the continuous, binary, categorical, and ordered measures to be modelled using linear, logistic, multinomial and ordinal logistic specifications, respectively ( Stata. Manual Stata, 2015., 2015 ). A first model (A) tested the pathways of MHP (G0) in OHC (G1), and the transmission of MHP (G0→G1) and OHC (G1→G2) across two generations. A second model (B) was estimated by introducing into the Model A the pathway passing through MHP (G1) in the association of OHC in G1 and G2. The models fit of A and B were compared using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information criterion (BIC) criteria. In order to test whether the paths are differentially strong between working and middle/upper class, we performed the Wald test. All analyses were carried out using Stata version 16.1 (Stata Corp).
Previous studies support the existence of sex differences in mental health ( Labaka et al., 2018 ; Riecher-Rössler, 2017 ). Therefore, to explore whether the results diverge between the sexes, we performed the GSEM analysis (Model B) separately for males and females (G2) (Supplementary material- SM I). Since the reasons underlying the OHC placements might vary according to the age group (e.g. teens placements tend to be related to own behaviour), we also repeated the analysis (Model B) taking into consideration only placements occurred in young age (0–12 years old), at both generations (SM II), and excluding cases where the first hospitalization of MHP (G1) occurred after the first OHC placement (G2) as a way to minimize reverse causality (SM III). Another additional model was tested by including other potential confounders, i.e. parental age at first birth (G1) ( Brännström et al., 2015 ) and number of siblings (G2) (SM IV).
Additionally, in the supplementary material, information about (SM V) OHC in G1 and G2 by sex, and (SM VI) OHC and MHP of G1 and G0 according to specific periods (Period I: 1953–1959; Period II: 1960–1965; Period III: 1966–1972) are provided. Further descriptive data are available as follow: (SM VII) the number of hospitalizations for MHP in G1 per year; (SM VIII) the age of individuals placed in OHC in G2; (SM IX) the number of individuals placed in OHC in G2 per year.

Section: 3. Results

Table 1 shows that around 9% and 4% of individuals from G1 and G2 had experiences of being placed in OHC, respectively. Nearly 6% of individuals of G0 and G1 had mental health problems. Males and females were equally distributed in G1 and G2, and half of G0 belonged to the working class. Table 1 . Characteristics of the study variables. Characteristics Empty Cell Generation 0 Generation 1 Generation 2 N (%) N (%) N (%) Out-of-home care No – 10,362 (91.4) 24,004 (96.4) Yes – 971 (8.6) 901 (3.6) Mental health problems No 10,618 (93.7) 10,618 (93.7) – Yes 715 (6.3) 715 (6.3) – Sex Male – 5538 (49.0) 12,838 (51.5) Female – 5795 (51.0) 12,067 (48.5) Occupational class Middle/upper class 5630 (49.7) – – Working class 5703 (50.3) – – n = 11,333 (G0 and G1); n = 24,905 (G2).
Fig. 2 shows the distribution of birth years of G2 by sex. In Fig. 3 we contrasted the occupational classes (G0); we observed statistically significant differences in the prevalence of OHC in G1 and G2 between the middle/upper class (G1: 5.4%, G2: 2.5%) compared to the working class (G1: 11.7%, G2: 4.9%). Similar patterns, also statistically significant, were found for G0 MHP (middle/upper class: 5%, working class: 8%) and G1 (middle/upper class: 5.5%, working class: 7%). Download: Download high-res image (262KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Distribution of birth years of Generation 2 (G2) by sex (G2) (N = 24,905). Download: Download high-res image (222KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Prevalence (%) of OHC and MHP, respectively, by occupational class in G0.
As demonstrated in Table 2 , among G2 individuals who had a parent placed in OHC, the odds of being placed themselves was 4.97 times (95% CI 4.28–5.77) higher than among G2 individuals who did not have a parent with OHC experience. This association was attenuated by 12% when MHP in G0 was included in Model 2 (OR 4.49, 95% CI 3.82–5.28). In Model 3, the addition of MHP in G1 further decreased the strength of the intergenerational transmission of OHC by 13% (OR 4.01, 95% CI 3.40–4.73). Concerning the results from the regressions models stratified by occupational class, we observed that the total reduction in the strength of association when including MHP in G0 and G1 (Model 1: OR 4.02, 95% CI 2.95–5.47; Model 2: OR 3.49, 95% CI 2.49–4.90 (17%); Model 3: OR 3.21, 95% CI 2.27–4.52 (11%)) was greater in the middle/upper class compared to the working class (Model 1: OR 5.35, 95% CI 4.50–6.39; Model 2: OR 4.88, 95% CI 4.06–5.88 (10%); Model 3: OR 4.37, 95% CI 3.61–5.28 (13%)). Table 2 . Multiple regression models of OHC (G2) (n = 24,905). Odds Ratio (OR) for OHC(G2) 95% Confidence intervals (95%CI) Empty Cell Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Empty Cell Overall Occupational class Overall Occupational class Overall Occupational class Middle upper working Middle upper working Middle upper Working OHC(G1) 4.97 (4.28–5.77) 4.02 (2.95–5.47) 5.35 (4.50–6.39) 4.49 (3.82–5.28) 3.49 (2.49–4.90) 4.88 (4.06–5.88) 4.01 (3.40–4.73) 3.21 (2.27–4.52) 4.37 (3.61–5.28) MHP(G0) – – – 1.46 (1.19–1.79) 1.57 (1.05–2.37) 1.43 (1.13–1.81) 1.37 (1.11–1.68) 1.54 (1.02–12.33) 1.33 (1.04–1.69) MHP(G1) – – – – – 4.06 (3.43–4.80) 5.51 (4.17–7.29) 3.47 (2.82–4.28) OHC=Out-of-home care; MHP = Mental health problems. *Overall models are adjusted for sex (G1 & G2) and occupational class (G0). Models stratified by occupational class (G0) are adjusted for sex (G1).
Fig. 4 presents the path models A and B with exponentiated coefficients (Odds Ratios). Model A encompasses the intergenerational associations of OHC (G1→G2) and MHP (G0→G1) and the pathway from MHP in G0 to OHC in G1. Model B adds to Model A the potential mediating pathway through MHP in G1 for the association between OHC in G1 and OHC in G2 (G1 OHC→ G1 MHP →G2 OHC). Contrasting the AIC/BIC of Models A and B, the latter had the best fit regarding both the overall and the stratified models ( Fig. 2 ). Given that the model fit statistics favours Model B, we base our discussion on that model. According to the overall analysis, there was evidence of an intergenerational transmission of OHC (G1→G2) (OR 4.78) and MHP (G0→G1) (OR 1.42). In turn, the association of OHC in G1 and G2 was greater in the working class (OR 4.70) compared to the middle/upper class (OR 3.61) (p < 0.001 Wald test); the association between MHP (G0→G1) was more evident among the working class (OR 1.51 vs 1.20 (middle/upper class)), but no statistically significant difference was found contrasting pathway coefficients (p > 0.05 Wald test). The association between MHP in G0 and OHC in G1 was statistically significant in the overall (OR 9.09) as well as the stratified analyses, although the strongest effect was demonstrated for the middle/upper class (OR 13.36 vs 7.54 (working class)). Download: Download high-res image (419KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Generalised structural equation model for the intergenerational transmission of out-of-home care and the mediating role of mental health problems. Estimates reflect the results from the overall model as well as from the model stratified for occupational class, presented as ‘Overall’/‘Middle/upper class’/‘Working class’ (n = 24,905). The overall model is adjusted for sex (G1 & G2) and occupational class (G0), whereas the model stratified by occupational class (G0) is adjusted for sex (G1); covariates are omitted from the figure. Presented estimates are exponentiated coefficients (Odds Ratios). Statistical significance tested at 5%; n. s, not significant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. AIC/BIC (model A: 44546.44/44635.79 (overall), 44443.62/44589.83 (stratified); model B: 44195.99/44301.59 (overall), 44111.53/44290.23 (stratified).
Regarding the pathway through MHP in G1 for the association between OHC in G1 and OHC in G2, there was a significant overall effect of OHC in G1 on MHP in G1 (OR 2.34) and from MHP in G1 to OHC in G2 (OR 4.23). The former indirect pathway (G1 OHC →G1 MHP) was more evident within the working class contrasted with the middle/upper class, although there was not a statistically significant difference (p > 0.05, based on a Wald test). The latter indirect pathway (G1 MPH→G2 OHC) was stronger among the middle/upper class group) (p = 0.009, based on a Wald test).
The conclusions were similar when we repeated the analysis separately for males and females (G2) (SM I). Regarding the analysis restricted to placements of young children (ages 0–12), the OHC transmission (G1→G2) was more evident among the middle/upper group (OR 3.99, 95% CI 2.51–6.33) compared to the working class (OR 2.86, 95% CI 2.21–3.70) (p > 0.05, based on a Wald test), while in the main analysis the opposite was observed. Regarding SM III, we set up the first hospitalizations of MHP in G1 and the first OHC placements in G2. Among those who had both been placed in OHC (G2) and had parents with a history of MHP (G1), approximately one third (18 of 54 cases) of the first hospitalizations of MHP actually occurred after the first placements. When excluding these 18 cases, the results were quite similar to the main analysis. Adding parental age at first birth and number of siblings to Model B did not affect the estimates. Furthermore, the model fit statistics favours the most parsimonious model (i.e. adjusted only for sex and occupational class) (SM IV).

Section: 4. Discussion

This study sought to investigate the interrelated patterning of OHC and MHP across three generations, hypothesizing the existence of differential patterns depending on the socioeconomic living conditions in the family of origin (G0). Overall, the results supported the intergenerational continuity of OHC and elucidated the role of MHP in this transmission. Moreover, while the results were indicative of an intergenerational transmission of MHP in the most socioeconomically disadvantaged group , MHP (G1) had a significant role in the transmission of OHC irrespective of socioeconomic conditions in G0. These findings were confirmed by testing the magnitude/attenuation of the association between intergenerational transmission of OHC and MHP and also by analysing specific pathways.
It is well-known that children involved in OHC are a vulnerable group which have poorer long-term outcomes (compared to peers without OHC experiences) in many life areas such as education, economic hardship, offending, substance abuse, and health ( Brännström et al., 2017 ; Kääriälä and Hiilamo, 2017 ). Although discontinuity is more common than continuity from an intergenerational perspective ( Rutter, 1998 ), it is alarming that OHC seems to have a continuity component. In turn, the unfavourable outcomes experienced by these children can potentially be passed on between generations, feeding into a cycle of adverse experiences.
Our study corroborates previous findings that children whose parents spent time in OHC are at greater risk of being placed in OHC ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ; Jackson Foster et al., 2015 ; Armfield et al., 2021 ; Wall-Wieler et al., 2018a , 2018c ). It is reasonable to think that the higher probability of OHC alumni to have their children placed outside home may be related to the fact that OHC alumni do not see the placements as an unthinkable solution compared to parents with no personal experience with the OHC; they may even see this as an opportunity to get help. However, it is important to note that Swedish child protection laws have always had elements of coercion and the voluntary aspects of placement in the OHC may differ in practice.
We also found that the intergenerational transmission of OHC was more evident among families originating from the working class group. Having unfavourable socioeconomic conditions may lead to a greater risk of OHC placement among families previously involved with the child welfare system ; not necessarily because of the OHC intergenerational transmission, but because they have fewer resources. That said, it is fundamental to better understand the influence of socioeconomic factors in the intergenerational transmission of OHC, and less than a handful of studies ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ; Jackson Foster et al., 2015 ; Wall-Wieler et al., 2018b ) have attempted to address this. For instance, research carried out with Danish data found that, despite a substantial reduction in the effect of OHC transmission by resources (i.e. parent education, labour market affiliation, criminal activities), the effect remained statistically significant. The authors also pointed out that part of this transmission may be a reflection of a less tangible part of this context, such as parents' behaviour and style ( Mertz and Andersen, 2017 ). Moreover, the Swedish population-based study by Wall-Wieler et al. (2018) found that even after adjusting not only for social, but also for behavioural characteristics (e.g. levels of education and employment , substance misuse, psychiatric disorders, and criminal convictions), children whose parents had a history of OHC were still significantly more likely to be placed in care ( Wall-Wieler et al., 2018a ). Given such findings, we might assume that the transmission of OHC across generations is impacted by socioeconomic factors to some extent, but that other aspects also appear to interplay in this context.
In this sense, the key contribution of this study lies in the new findings that come to disentangle potential mechanisms (e.g. MHP) underlying the context of inequalities of OHC placements. We found that the intergenerational transmission of MHP was evident among children originating from the most disadvantaged backgrounds (i.e. working class). This result supports research that points to the burden of MHP in society and brings to the fore the relevance of breaking the cycle of social inequalities in health, especially in the context of MHP ( Allen et al., 2014 ). Johnston et al. (2013) investigated the intergenerational transmission of MHP and its long-run economic costs in three British generations; they suggested that poor mental health are associated with severe limitations in socioeconomic functioning and it can cast a long shadow over family life. The authors also believe that given the chronic nature and the established hereditary component of many mental health conditions, the transmission of mental health across generations is one potential mechanism by which socioeconomic disadvantage is passed on across generations of the same family ( Johnston et al., 2013 ).
The role of MHP in the transmission of OHC was evident irrespective of social class. Even though results indicated a stronger role of MHP among the middle/upper class compared to working class (MHP G1→OHC G2), this patter was not consistent throughout the whole pathway (e.g. OHC G1→MHP G1). Furthermore, our findings underpin existent knowledge from parallel literature focusing on the intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment, which have identified maternal psychological problems as a key mechanism of vulnerability transmission from mother to child ( Yang et al., 2018 ; Plant et al., 2013 , 2017 ). Foster and colleagues (2015) evaluated whether the alumni's mental health and income operate as mediating mechanisms between their parents' functioning and their own children's risk of foster care. They found that depression mediate the association between father's functioning (e.g. mental health problems, criminal involvement, and employment status) and placement of their own children through less social support ; furthermore, poverty alumni was not associated with parent functioning, and was only related to higher levels of positive relative social support ( Jackson Foster et al., 2015 ).
Strengths of this study include the population-based approach in G1 and the possibility of prospectively following a multigenerational cohort from birth up until adulthood. Thanks to the high-quality, full coverage administrative registers kept in Sweden, there was very little attrition and loss to follow-up. Another aspect that makes this study unique is the possibility of following two complex parallel processes (i.e. OHC placements and mental health problems) at the same time as accounting for differential patterning according to socioeconomic conditions of the family of origin, consequently, expanding the knowledge of the role of MHP in explaining inequalities in the transmission of OHC.
Some limitations should however be considered. Although this is a population-based study with a representative sample of the region of the capital Stockholm, caution must be taken with the generalizability of results. For example, we are missing information about (1) children who were send to foster families residing outside this region before the age of ten, and (2) those who were born outside Stockholm and exposed to child welfare measures before they moved to Stockholm.
Comparability between the measurements of OHC placements and mental health across generations is another limitation. Practices, visions, and institutions have changed since the 1950s and 1960s in Sweden. The welfare optimism declined after 1980 and, with it, the tendency for a less interventionist system. Moreover, family preservation and family foster care placement have attained a stronger focus. It is important to note that the OHC G1 group mainly consisted of individuals with short placements (less than two years), and most of them were placed in early childhood (age 0–6 years), while contemporary placements primarily occur among teenage children. Although poor socioeconomic conditions, lone parenthood (mother), and parental psychopathology are still potent risk markers for OHC placement ( Franzen et al., 2008 ), ethnicity has not been identified as a risk factor in older cohorts since the Swedish population was more homogenous (i.e. among the few individuals with a foreign background in our cohort, most of them are from Finland); therefore, it may affect our findings by underestimating the results in relation to the transmission of OHC.
Measurement errors are potentially tied the different forms of mental health assessment in each generation. For G0, MHP were indicated by information from the social services – which were also the responsible party for registering OHC placements – whereas, for G1, MHP were assessed in health care system. This might compromise the validity of the measures of the G0's mental health problems, and also explain why the association between MHP in G0 and OHC in G1 was stronger compared to the corresponding association in the subsequent generation(s). Despite the fact that we used information from socioeconomic conditions only from G0, it is important to note that the working class of the 1950s was a large group and possibly more heterogeneous in terms of living conditions compared to contemporary years. Since then, the middle class has grown, which makes it reasonable to expect a general upward social mobility between G0 and G1, and that differences between class backgrounds concerning the associations between MHP and OHC placements have also changed. However, further investigations are needed to support this claim.
We examined a crude indicator of OHC that reflects placement experiences at any age (from birth to age 19) without discriminating between reasons and severity, which potentially vary between childhood (i.e., maltreatment/neglect/family dysfunction) and adolescence (i.e. behavioural problems). The lack of data on placement (in)stability and quality of care is another limitation of this study. Furthermore, we do not have data for both parents of G2; this means that is has only been possible to assess continuities in relation to one parent. Moreover, including siblings who share the same father or mother could result in an overestimation of the effects; however, the mental health status which is supposed to affect the intergenerational transmission of OHC may still differ between siblings, making this overestimation less likely. Even excluding mental health problems with high heritability , genetics can still interfere in the intergenerational transmission of mental and behavioural disorders considered in our study. Although parsimonious models are preferable in path analysis , other confounders might act in these associations. Last but not least, although we have performed analysis excluding cases that MHP (G1) occurred after the OHC placement (G2), establishing the true direction of the effect remains a challenge since the processes leading up to OHC placement are temporally intertwined with the development of MHP both within and across generations.
From a public health perspective, our study suggests that structural actions focusing on social determinants of health are necessary to reduce inequalities in the transmission of both OHC and MHP. Such efforts aim to alleviate the impact that socioeconomic adversities might have on the exacerbation of intergenerational transmission of OHC and MHP.
In our view, the results presented here have substantial implications for practice. As stated earlier by practical guidance in the field and other researchers ( Vinnerljung et al., 2006 ; Hjern et al., 2004 ; Vinnerljung and Sallnäs, 2008 ; Nordens Välfärdscenter. B, 2015 ), the need of a comprehensive investigation of the mental health of children involved in care is fundamental. Clinical mental health agencies should ensure in their internal guidelines that children that experience OHC are granted easy access to diagnostic procedures and priority in access to treatment. The same recommendations are valid for health services that meet children and adolescents who have left care; ensuring that those who leave care receive adequate psychological support in adulthood is a potential strategy to interrupt cycles of transmission of adversity and vulnerability between generations. Our recommendations for practice reinforce the need for universal actions in which all children with history of care must receive appropriate mental health support in life, added to targeted and proportionate efforts among groups with additional vulnerabilities to OHC (for example, families with disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds, or those with an established history of MHP) ( Allen et al., 2014 ).
Finally, there is still scope for investigating modifiable factors such as educational attainment that may break the intergenerational transmission of OHC. Furthermore, there is a lack of studies investigating protective factors from OHC experiences and social and health-related aspect of the parents involved in OHC. More in-depth studies are also necessary to understand how the different indicators of the socioeconomic conditions of the family (e.g. education, income) evolve with OHC experiences over the generations. In additional, it is important to further explore causality issues regarding the potential bidirectional relationship between OHC and MHP. Last, but not least, more research is needed to explore associations across paternal and maternal lineages in the context of the intergenerational transmission of OHC and MHP.

Section: Credit author statement

Viviane S. Straatmann: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Project administration and Funding acquisition; Josephine Jackisch: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing and Funding acquisition; Lars Brännström: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing and Funding acquisition; Ylva B. Almquist: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration and Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare under Grant numbers [ 2016-07148 ; 2020–00274 ]. The funding source has not been involved in the study design; analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the articles; and in the decision to submit it for publication.
