Title: Interdependent pathways between socioeconomic position and health: A Swedish longitudinal register-based study


Abstract: Abstract

Health inequalities are generated by the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work and age. From a life-course perspective, these conditions are formed by complex causal relationships with mutual and intertwined paths between socioeconomic position and health. This study attempts to disentangle some of these processes by examining pathways between socioeconomic position and health across the life-course. We used yearly Swedish national register data with information from over 31 years for two cohorts born 1941–1945 and 1961–1965. We analyzed associations between several indicators of childhood and adult socioeconomic position and health, measured by number of in-patient hospitalizations. We estimated within- and between-person associations using random intercept cross-lagged panel models. The results showed bi-directional associations between socioeconomic position and health that varied in strength across the life-course. Age variations in the associations were primarily observed when individuals aged into or out of age-stratified institutions. In ages where transitions from education to the labor market are common, the associations from health to income and education were strong. Around and after retirement age, the between-person association from health to income was weak, while the association from income to health strengthened. Within-person estimates showed no association between income and subsequent hospitalization among older persons , indicating no direct causal effect of income change on health in this age group. For persons of middle age, the associations were of similar strength in both directions and present at both the between- and within-person level. Our findings highlight the importance of theoretical frameworks and methods that can incorporate the interplay between social, economic, and biological processes over the life-course in order to understand how health inequalities are generated.

Section: 1. Introduction

The relationship between socioeconomic position and health has been extensively researched. A wide variety of socioeconomic conditions are associated with health across the life-course, from infancy to old age ( Chetty et al., 2016 ; Heshmati et al., 2020 ; Huisman, 2004 ; Lundberg, 1991 ; Mackenbach et al., 2005 ; Martikainen et al., 2014 ; Smith, 1999 ). There is a broad range of mechanisms that generate inequalities in health, as exemplified in the well-known definition of social determinants of health as “the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work and age” ( CSDH, 2008 ). Approaching these processes from a life-course perspective reveals a series of relationships with mutual and intertwined paths between socioeconomic position and health. In the current study we attempt to disentangle some of these processes.
Researchers that investigate health inequalities often acknowledge dynamic interdependencies in the relationship between socioeconomic position and health ( Deaton and Paxson, 1998 ; Frijters, Haisken-DeNew, and Shields, 2005 ; Lundberg, 2020 ; O'Donnell et al., 2015 ). Aittomäki et al. (2012) investigate the bi-directional relationship between economic resources, labor market position, and health with Finnish register data. They find evidence supporting effects in both directions, with stronger effects from socioeconomic indicators to health. In an attempt to identify the dominant direction in the bi-directional relationship between income and health, Benzeval and Judge (2001) summarize results from both primary data analyses and from a literature review. They conclude that the “results provide convincing evidence that income and health are causally related” ( Benzeval and Judge, 2001 :1387) and that health selection, i.e. the effect of health on income, accounts for a smaller part of the association. In a more recent systematic review of the literature, however, Kröger et al. (2015) find no consensus on the dominant direction of causality. Rather, they conclude that the direction of causality may depend on the specific indicator of socioeconomic position that is used. Furthermore, they find that studies on indicators that reflect labor market participation and success tend to find equal support for social causation and health selection. In contrast, studies that include education tend to mainly find support for social causation. This variation can partly be attributed to the effects of health on the capacity to work; for example, García-Gómez (2011) finds that health affects the probability of employment in nine European countries. Moreover, measures of socioeconomic position that are less time-variant, such as education, is likely less affected by changes in health. In sum, results from these studies have not provided a definite answer to the dominant direction of the relationship. Furthermore, pursuing a single definite answer for one dominant direction of causality may not be meaningful since these processes vary across indicators, life stages, health measures, and context. A more constructive approach for understanding the formation of health inequalities may instead be to view the underlying mechanisms as processes of mutual interdependencies.
A life-course perspective on the relation between socioeconomic position and health must consider typical age-stratified behaviors and activities. Institutions are organized around specific age groups, such as transitions in and out of education, work, and retirement. This age stratification contributes to expected and normative behaviors associated with chronological age ( Dannefer and Kelley-Moore, 2009 ; Riley, 1971 ) and is central for understanding key transition points that shape individual life-course trajectories ( Bernardi et al., 2019 ). The process of forming individual socioeconomic position begins at birth through early childhood, a period when parental characteristics affect early life circumstances and educational outcomes ( Heckman, 2008 ) and continues through labor market outcomes and income trajectories later in life ( Sirniö et al., 2016 ). Likewise, health across the life-course determines the capacity to which individuals are able to participate in social and economic activities and influences the propensity for several key transitions, for example, educational choices ( Mikkonen et al., 2020 ), family formation ( Waldron et al., 1996 ), and labor market participation ( García-Gómez, 2011 ). Similar to how the individual may be biologically more sensitive during specific periods of development ( Kuh et al., 2003 ), the age-stratified institutions and transitions described above point to the importance of when an exposure occurs. Poor health or adverse social conditions during a life stage when the individual is likely to make important decisions may have more far-reaching consequences than the same exposure experienced at a different life stage. The relative importance of education, income, occupation, and health is, therefore, likely to vary across ages and for different measures of health.
Given these life-course variations, the temporal and causal ordering of indicators of socioeconomic position and health are important aspects in analyses that examine the interdependencies between these processes ( Lahelma et al., 2004 ). In this study we are concerned with: (1) direction of causality, (2) indicator of socioeconomic position, and (3) stage of the life-course. While few studies have investigated these elements in one single analysis, Hoffmann et al. (2018) attempts this in a recent study where they investigate a bi-directional relationship between health and different indicators of socioeconomic position. With data from ten Western European countries, including Sweden, using measures of both socioeconomic position and health from childhood to old age, they find evidence for both directions of causality with varied effects over the life-course. While childhood socioeconomic conditions and childhood health have effects that are similar in magnitude during the transition to adulthood, socioeconomic indicators account for a larger effect on health than vice versa during the transition from adulthood to old age. In this study we use a similar methodological approach to that of Hoffmann et al. (2018) .
Moreover, Hoffmann et al. (2018) showed that socioeconomic position was more stable than health during the life-course. This finding corroborates an element of accumulation or path dependency where earlier states impact subsequent states and have both direct and indirect long-term consequences ( DiPrete and Eirich, 2006 ). Life-course patterns in income tend to show that income increases with age through much of the working life, with more rapid increases in younger working ages and a higher degree of stabilization in older ages ( Bhuller et al., 2017 ; Böhlmark and Lindquist, 2006 ; Mincer, 1974 ).
Health status, on the other hand, is potentially subject to larger intra-individual variability due to events such as sudden health shocks or temporary health problems. Conversely, it has been shown that persons with more chronic and multiple health problems (i.e. multimorbidity) are at a greater risk of death, disability, functional decline, and other adverse health-related outcomes ( Marengoni et al., 2011 ; Salive, 2013 ). Moreover, health status is heavily dependent on age. Severe health complications that require hospitalization are rare occurrences in younger ages but become increasingly prevalent among older persons . These processes indicate that health status could, like income and socioeconomic position, potentially follow patterns of path dependent accumulation that strengthens with increased age.
The aim of this study is to investigate pathways between socioeconomic position and health using a life-course approach. We analyze Swedish population register data that include yearly and objective measures of socioeconomic position and health over 31 years. We include measures of poor health measured by in-patient hospitalizations, education, and income in childhood, adulthood, and old age. Education is typically constant throughout adulthood and occupation can only be assessed during working life and only for those active on the labor market. Therefore, we focus on income as the time-variant indicator of socioeconomic position during adulthood and old age. In addition, we link data on parents and children, which allows us to include objective measures of parental socioeconomic position. Lastly, we apply statistical analyses that estimate both between-person and within-person effects.
In order to address the overarching aim, we formulate and empirically test a series of hypotheses. The first hypothesis concerns the variability, or autocorrelation , of health and socioeconomic position over the individual life-course. Based on theories of path dependent accumulation, research from income trajectories across the life-course, and findings from Hoffmann et al. (2018) , we hypothesize that socioeconomic position is more stable than health across the life-course and that both socioeconomic position and health are increasingly stable at older ages. H1A Health status has lower autocorrelation than socioeconomic position during the life-course. H1B Autocorrelation for socioeconomic position and health strengthens with increased age.
Previous research suggests that the relationship between health and socioeconomic position is characterized by dynamic and mutual interdependencies ( Aittomäki et al., 2012 ; Benzeval and Judge, 2001 ; Kröger et al., 2015 ). Therefore, our second hypothesis proposes that: H2 The relation between socioeconomic position and health is bi-directional.
Lastly, our third hypothesis proposes that the relationship between health and socioeconomic measures varies across the life-course ( Hoffmann et al., 2018 ). Health is potentially important in the transition from adolescence to adulthood when most persons are pursuing an education and entering the labor market. In contrast, the pathway going from health to socioeconomic resources is likely weaker in old age, especially after retirement when income is independent of labor market participation. Lastly, socioeconomic differences in health among older persons have previously shown conflicting results. While the onset of declining health status may depend on accumulated exposures throughout the life-course, it has been suggested that biological processes attenuate socioeconomic differences in old age health ( House et al., 1994 ; Rehnberg, 2020 ). H3 The relative importance of the different pathways between socioeconomic position and health vary over the life-course.

Section: 2. Data

We use Swedish national register data that cover the entire population. Yearly information from registers was collected from 1985 to 2016, complemented with information on parents’ socioeconomic background in 1970. Registers from 1985 and onward included measures of hospitalizations and education. From 1990 and onward the registers also included measures of income.
In order to capture all stages of the life-course, we constructed two cohorts, one younger cohort born between 1961 and 1965 (aged 25–29 in 1990 and 51–55 in 2016) and one older cohort born between 1941 and 1945 (aged 45–49 in 1990 and 71–75 in 2016). We only include persons with complete data during this period, which excludes persons that did not survive and person that emigrated or migrated during this period.
Poor health was measured by number of in-patient hospital visits during five-year periods between 1985 through 2014, and an additional two-year period covering 2015–2016. Information on hospitalizations was collected from the National Patient Register (NPR). Outpatient care visits and primary care visits did not have full coverage in the register data during this period and were not included. Measuring number of in-patient hospitalizations as a proxy for poor health captures more severe health complications and therefore only reflect parts of the individual health status. Additionally, in-patient hospitalizations can be considered a more objective measure of health status since it is conditioned on a physician's evaluation for care need compared to self-reported indicators or primary care visits which may, more so than in-patient hospitalizations, reflect health-seeking behavior.
In order to capture hospital visits that were more likely to be related to poor health, we excluded visits due to pregnancy or childbirth as the main or contributory cause for hospitalization. Diagnoses from hospital visits before 1997 were coded with the standard International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD) 9, visits relating to chapter 9 (630–679) were excluded. Hospitalizations during 1997 and later were coded with ICD 10 , and visits relating to chapter 15 (O00–O9A) were excluded.
The distribution of number of hospitalizations was skewed due to a small number of persons with a large number of in-patient hospitalizations. A large number of hospitalizations reflect health conditions that require regular inpatient care, rather than separate health problems. Therefore, persons with more than ten hospital visits during each five-year period were coded as having ten or more visits. This choice was based on tests with alternative models using different coding of the variable, which showed that a model with a cut-off at ten performed best in terms of model fit indices (see electronic supplementary material : Sensitivity tests and modeling strategy ).
Measures of disposable household income were compiled for the same time periods as health, using information from the national income and tax register. Disposable household income was constructed as a summary measure of income from all sources minus taxes and transfers at the household level. For comparability across household compositions, the summary measure was divided by the square root of the number of household members. Finally, the variable was divided into percentiles divided by 100, ranging from 0.01 (lowest) to 1 (highest). The percentile rank was calculated for the complete sample every year and then averaged across each five-year period.
Highest achieved education was measured 2005 in the younger cohort and 1990 in the older cohort. This was done based on the assumption that persons in the younger cohort had reached their highest education by 2005 when they were aged between 40 and 44. Persons in the older cohort were more likely to have reached their highest education already in 1990 when they were between 45 and 49. Education was measured on a seven graded scale from no education or pre-primary education up to second stage tertiary education, equivalent to the ISCED-97 scale (see Table 1 for frequencies). Table 1 . Descriptive statistics . Empty Cell Cohort born 1961–1965 Cohort born 1941–1945 Total observations 516 638 429 156 Hospital visits during period Mean visits Mean visits per year Std. deviation Mean visits Mean visits per year Std. deviation 1985–2016 (entire period) 2.51 0.08 4.04 0.13 1985–1989 0.40 0.08 1.02 0.38 0.08 1.01 1990–1994 0.38 0.08 1.02 0.43 0.09 1.08 1995–1999 0.32 0.06 0.97 0.47 0.09 1.16 2000–2004 0.30 0.06 0.95 0.54 0.11 1.23 2005–2009 0.35 0.07 1.05 0.69 0.14 1.42 2010–2014 0.43 0.09 1.21 0.92 0.18 1.70 2015–2016 a 0.19 0.10 0.76 0.47 0.24 1.17 Education % % ISCED 0–1 0.4 24.6 ISCED 2 11.0 8.3 ISCED 3 55.1 41.2 ISCED 4 8.2 2.4 ISCED 5 24.5 22.5 ISCED 6 or higher 0.9 1.0 Parental education % % No education or unknown 0.2 28.6 Basic education 33.9 50.3 Secondary or higher 65.9 21.1 Income quartile value in 1000 SEK b 25% 50% 75% Std. deviation 25% 50% 75% Std. deviation 1990–1994 141.4 165.8 193.7 0.24 175.5 218.3 264.1 0.27 1995–1999 138.4 166.0 197.9 0.26 174.7 221.8 274.8 0.27 2000–2004 164.4 201.9 245.2 0.26 196.8 252.8 318.7 0.27 2005–2009 194.8 247.0 305.4 0.26 199.4 264.0 346.9 0.26 2010–2014 229.7 303.4 385.2 0.27 179.7 241.8 335.4 0.27 2015–20161 254.1 345.9 448.8 0.28 167.7 220.6 311.9 0.28 a Note that the interval 2015–2016 is 2 years as compared to the previous five-year intervals. b Income adjusted for inflation with 2016 as index year.
Parental socioeconomic position was measured by the highest achieved education from any parent during the year 1970 using 1970-census data or between 1985 and 1989, using data from the yearly standardized collection of educational information. We included these years to cover as many persons as possible with information on parental education. In the older cohort (aged 45 to 49 in 1990), several cohort members had no living parents in 1985, and therefore the inclusion of data from 1970 increased the number of complete observations. However, the educational classification from 1970 did not follow the ISCED-97 scale. Parental education was therefore coded in three levels: no education or unknown; basic education (no secondary); and secondary or higher.
Pathway analysis was used to estimate the statistical associations for the hypothesized relationships between the variables. This method is appropriate for testing entire systems of variables that are modeled after theoretical assumptions about their relationship ( Byrne, 2013 ). The main model tested in this study is usually described as a cross-lagged panel model (CLPM). This type of model describes reciprocal relationships between variables over time. The model is crossed because it estimates the relationship from one variable to another, and vice versa and is lagged because it estimates the relationships between the same variables across different time points. The models that we tested estimated the relationship between income at time t and hospitalizations at time t+1 and simultaneously the relationship between hospitalizations at time t and income at time t+1 . In other words, we analyzed the directional association that income and hospitalizations have over time.
In addition to the cross-lagged part of the model, we included parental education and own education to account for processes during childhood and early adulthood that may allocate individuals into income groups. We adjusted for sex at the first measured instance of each variable (education, income, and hospitalizations). The path models along with a subset of estimated path coefficients for the two cohorts are presented in Fig. 1 , Fig. 2 in the results section. Lastly, in-line with the cross-lagged design we allowed the residual variances of income and number of hospitalizations measured during the same period to correlate. Full models are presented in the electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Tables 1–2) .
The modeled paths between education, income, and number of hospitalizations were based on our theoretical understanding of the bi-directional relation between these concepts. In the final models, we included direct paths between each measure of socioeconomic position and health and subsequent measures of both variables. The only exception was paths between education and income after retirement, as we assumed that no direct paths connected education with pension incomes. This assumption was confirmed by a model including those paths, showing no or very small associations (not shown).
The final cross-lagged panel model was arrived at after several iterations based on alternative model specifications that were mostly related to how age were modeled as well as direct and indirect paths between education and subsequent measures of hospitalizations and income. The choice of modeled paths was thus primarily based on our theoretical assumption of the longitudinal relationships between education, income, and number of hospitalizations, and by adjustments in paths that produced the best model fit indices. All paths in the final analytical model were statistically significant, although, with varying effect sizes. Model fit estimates (CFI, TLI, and RMSE) were in the ranges that are considered excellent fit. Model fit indices and full models including standard errors and p-values are reported in the electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data . Further motivations for model choices and sensitivity tests for alternative model specifications are presented in the electronic supplementary material : Sensitivity tests and modeling strategy .
The CLPM does not separate between-person and within-person effects and fails to account for stable differences between individuals. To mitigate this shortcoming, an extension of the CLPM, the random intercept cross-lagged panel model (RI-CLPM) has been proposed ( Hamaker et al., 2015 ). In the RI-CLPM, latent intercept factors are estimated for each person, providing estimates that fluctuate around each unit's own level over time instead of all units varying around a common group mean which is the case in the CLPM. Only the cross-lagged part of the model between income and number of hospitalizations were fitted due to problems with model convergence when using the RI-CLPM model specification with a weighted least square mean and variance adjusted estimator (see below) and exogenous variables. The two statistical approaches provide complementary results with different interpretations; we present coefficients from both within-person and between-person model specifications in the result section.
We used WLSMV (weighted least square mean and variance adjusted) as the estimator in the models. WLSMV performs better than maximum likelihood estimators when variables are not normally distributed (number of hospitalizations) and with ordinal variables (education) ( Brown, 2015 ; Li, 2016 ). All coefficients were standardized to ease the comparability of the estimates in the model. Standardized coefficients are interpreted as how many standard deviations the outcome variable will change per a standard deviation increase in the exposure variable. The statistical software used was R version 4.0.4 with the laavan package version 0.6–8 ( Rosseel, 2012 ).

Section: 3. Results

Table 1 presents descriptive information on the analytical sample. A total of 516 638 persons were included in the younger cohort and 429 156 persons were included in the older cohort. In the younger cohort, the mean number of hospital visits during the entire period (1985–2016) was 2.51, with a yearly average of between 0.06 and 0.10 visits per person. In the older cohort, the mean number of hospital visits during the entire period was 4.04 and yearly visits increased during the period from 0.08 visits per person during the first period (1985–1989) to 0.24 visits per person and year during the last period (2015–2016).
In the younger cohort born between 1961 and 1965, most persons (55.1%) had upper secondary education (ISCED 3) and 25.4% had tertiary education or higher (ISCED 5–6) in 2005. The most common education for the younger cohorts’ parents was secondary or higher (65.9%) and only 0.2% of the parents had no education or unknown educational level.
The educational level in the older cohort born between 1941 and 1945 was generally lower than in the younger cohort, 24.6% had a lower secondary or primary education (ISCED 0–2) and 41% had an upper secondary education . The educational level of the parents in the older cohort was similarly lower than in the younger cohort, for 28.6% of the cases education was classified as no education or unknown and 50.3% of the sample had basic education.
The average level and the spread of incomes increased during the measurement period in the younger cohort born between 1961 and 1965. The median yearly income was 141 400 SEK during the first period when the cohort was aged 25–33 and 254 100 SEK at the last period when the cohort was aged 50–55. In the older cohort, incomes were more stable. The median income increased somewhat before the cohort aged into retirement age and during the last two measurement periods (2010–2014, 2015–2016) the median income decreased. Moreover, in the older cohort, the spread of incomes increased, driven by both a decrease of incomes at the bottom of the distribution (see the 25th percentile) and by an increase of top incomes (see the 75th percentile).
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 presents the results from the cross-lagged pathway analyses. Each association that is estimated in the models is represented by an arrow and a standardized regression coefficient . In the cross-lagged part of the model two coefficients are presented at each arrow: one for the CLPM and one for the RI-CLPM presented in square brackets. Some associations from the CLPM are excluded in the graphical presentation, such as the association between education and each period measure of number of hospitalizations and income. All associations are reported in the electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Tables 1 and 2) . Download: Download high-res image (399KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Cross-lagged panel model with standardized coefficients for the younger cohort born between 1961 and 1965 (n = 516 638). Variable names are presented in the boxes followed by the age of the cohort at the measurement period. Estimates from the random intercept CLPM presented in square brackets. See electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Tables 1 and 5) for full model and model fit indices. Note: Hosp. = number of hospitalizations. Download: Download high-res image (403KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Cross-lagged panel model with standardized coefficients for the older cohort born between 1941 and 1945 (n = 429 156). Variable names are presented in the boxes followed by the age of the cohort at the measurement period. Estimates from the random intercept CLPM presented in square brackets. See electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Tables 2 and 6) for full model and model fit indices. Note: Hosp. = number of hospitalizations.
Results from the younger cohort are shown in Fig. 1 . Higher parental education was, as expected, associated with higher own education (0.260) and with fewer hospitalizations when the cohort was aged 20–28 (−0.029). Hospitalizations measured in ages 20–28 were negatively associated with education (−0.097), indicating that poorer health in young adulthood was associated with lower educational attainment. In turn, higher education was associated with higher income (0.178) and with fewer hospitalizations at ages 25–33 (−0.020).
From 1990 and onward the cross-lagged associations between income and hospitalizations were modeled ( Fig. 1 ). The strongest associations were unsurprisingly found in the lagged (autocorrelated) part of the model. The autocorrelated coefficients for hospitalizations ranged between 0.505 and 0.692. The associations between subsequent measures of income strengthened over time and the autocorrelated coefficients were larger for income than for hospitalizations. The autocorrelated between-person estimates from the CLPM indicate the correlation in the rank order of persons between the observed periods, while the estimates from the RI-CLPM (presented in square brackets in Fig. 1 ) show the within-person correlation over time. The autocorrelated between-person estimates and within person estimates for income were nearly identical. They started at 0.677 and exceeded 0.800 at the end of the period. The autocorrelated between-person estimates for hospitalizations ranged from 0.505 to 0.692 whereas the within-person estimates for number of hospitalizations were weaker and ranged from 0.302 to 0.418.
In the younger cohort, the crossed paths indicated that higher income was associated with fewer subsequent hospitalizations, and similarly, more frequent hospitalizations were associated with lower subsequent income ( Fig. 1 ). Generally, the coefficients were similar in strength in both directions, but with different patterns emerging across ages. The between-person associations for pathways from hospitalizations to income was strong (around −0.060) up until the last period when the cohort was aged 50–55 the coefficient dropped to −0.037. Similar, but weaker patterns were seen for the association from income to hospitalizations: the coefficients varied between −0.025 and −0.033 over the entire observation period. The association from education to number of hospital visits was similar in strength to that for income in the earliest period (−0.032), after which the coefficients weakened throughout the measurement periods (see electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Table 1) ).
The within-person estimates for the crossed paths from the random intercept model (shown in square brackets in Fig. 1 ) were stronger than the estimates from the CLPM for pathways from income to number of hospitalizations at several measurement periods. Similarly, the estimates for the pathways from number of hospitalizations to income were stronger in the RI-CLPM than from the CLPM except during the last period. These results show that an increased number of hospitalizations experienced by an individual predicts a subsequent change in that person's income, and vice versa.
Results from the older cohort are shown in Fig. 2 . In this cohort, parental education and own education are more distant measures, further removed from the cross-lagged part of the model as compared to the younger cohort. Nonetheless, the expected relationship was observed also in this model: higher parental education was associated with higher own education (0.162), and higher education was associated with fewer hospitalizations (−0.046) and higher income (0.297).
The lagged part of the model in the older cohort was consistent with results seen in the younger cohort. The between-person autocorrelated coefficients for hospitalizations, in other words, hospitalizations predicting future hospitalizations, were stable and ranged between 0.413 and 0.589 during the entire period ( Fig. 2 ). In contrast, the autocorrelated coefficients for income strengthened somewhat during the observed period and ranged from 0.821 to 0.916. The estimates from the RI-CLPM show that the autocorrelated within-person associations were of similar magnitude for income and substantially weaker for number of hospitalizations.
During the first half of the period (1990–2004) when the cohort was aged 45–63, the CLPM between-person crossed paths going from income to number of hospitalizations were comparably weak at −0.012 and −0.010, while the paths from hospitalizations to income were stronger at −0.051 and −0.049. During the last three measurement periods (2005–2016) when the cohort was aged above age 60, the associations from number of hospitalizations to income weakened and neared zero in the last two periods when the cohort aged into retirement. In contrast, the association from income to hospitalizations strengthened during the same period and peaked at −0.038 for the estimate of income at ages 60–68 predicting hospitalizations at ages 65–73. Higher education was associated with fewer hospitalizations and the coefficients were stronger for education than for income during the first three measurement periods in the crossed part of the model (see electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Table 2) ). In the last few periods when the cohort was aged above 60, education was dropped from the final model due to coefficients close to zero.
The crossed estimates for hospitalizations predicting income from the RI-CLPM (shown in square brackets in Fig. 2 ) were similar to estimates from the CLPM. This was not the case for income predicting subsequent hospitalization. There was no association between income during the first period (1990–1995, when the cohort was aged 45–53) and hospitalizations during the next period. The within-person estimates increased in magnitude and were similar to those from the CLPM when the cohort transitioned from the labor market and into retirement. During the last period, however, the within-person estimate from the RI-CLPM again deviated from the CLPM estimate and was close to zero and non-significant.
In order to examine if the observed associations differed by sex, we performed the same analyses on samples of men and women separately (see electronic supplementary material: Supplementary data (Tables 3 and 4) ). The associations were strikingly similar for most pathways. Two notable differences were seen, in the younger cohort, the associations from income to hospitalizations were slightly stronger for men than for women. In the older cohort, the coefficients were similar except for some paths where a reversed pattern was observed: the associations from income to hospitalizations were slightly stronger for women compared to men. Despite statistical differences, the magnitude of these differences was small. These results are congruent with previous research that has found similar associations for men and women, or slightly larger associations between socioeconomic variables and health for men depending on what indicators were studied ( Mustard and Etches, 2003 ).

Section: 4. Discussion

In this study, we examined associations between socioeconomic position, measured by education and income in adulthood, and poor health measured by number of in-patient hospitalizations using Swedish national register data with measures from 1970 and yearly from 1985 to 2016. We analyzed two cohorts and followed these for most of the adult life-course. The younger cohort was followed from age 20 to 55 and the older cohort was followed from age 40 to 75. We found strong autocorrelations between subsequent measures of income, which strengthened across the life-course. We also found strong autocorrelations for repeated measures of number of hospitalizations that remained relatively stable over time. Lastly, we found a bi-directional association between income and hospitalizations that varied in strength across ages.
The finding that the autocorrelation of income increased over time is consistent with previous research on income trajectories. Studies have shown that throughout working ages, income increases rapidly in younger ages and stabilizes in older working ages ( Bhuller et al., 2017 ; Böhlmark and Lindquist, 2006 ). However, it is worth noting that in this study we estimated relative income position, which is not necessarily impacted by life-cycle variation in absolute income levels. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to assume that like absolute income, relative income positions vary to a greater extent in earlier working ages due to a larger variation in the activities that young adults pursue. In older working ages career trajectories have to a large extent been solidified and labor market participation is higher and thus, also relative income positions are more stable.
We measured poor health with number of hospitalizations and the autocorrelation between the repeated measures of hospitalizations was weaker compared to what was observed for income. Notably, these autocorrelations were smaller when measured by within-person estimates, relative to between-person estimates. One reason for this finding might be that being hospitalized is a one-time occurrence that is not necessarily indicative of future health conditions. However, for a smaller group of persons with chronic health problems, in-patient hospitalization could be more frequent occurrences that are dependent on previous health status. Individuals with a consistently high or low number of hospitalizations contribute to higher between-person estimates, but not to higher within-person estimates. We hypothesized that the autocorrelated estimates for health would increase with age. This was based on the assumption that in old age when health deteriorates and multimorbidity is more prevalent, the onset of health problems might show tendencies toward path dependent accumulation ( Willson et al., 2007 ) and lead to subsequent increased risks of disability, functional decline, and other adverse health outcomes ( Marengoni et al., 2011 ; Salive, 2013 ). In both cohorts, we observed stable associations over time as the cohorts aged, including when the older cohort was between ages 70 and 75. It may be possible that this finding is driven by the measure of health used in this study, which only captures health problems that lead to in-patient hospitalizations.
Overall, the autocorrelated patterns for number of hospitalizations and income thus supported our initial hypothesis (H1A) where we hypothesized that repeated measures of income are expected to be more stable compared to repeated measures of poor health. Hypothesis 1B stated that we expected increased strength in the autocorrelated coefficients with increased age for both income and poor health. This hypothesis was supported for income, but not for health.
It has been suggested that the development of socioeconomic position and health occurs as an intertwined process across the life-course (see for example Kröger et al., 2015 ; Lahelma et al., 2004 ; Lundberg, 2020 ; O'Donnell et al., 2015 ). The results in this study corroborated this view. We used income as the primary time-varying measure of socioeconomic position and found support for a bi-directional relation with health during a large part of the adult life-course. The associations were somewhat stronger from hospitalizations affecting income when examining between-person associations. These associations indicated that a low relative position in the income distribution was associated with a higher number of hospitalizations, and vice versa. The second indicator of socioeconomic position that we included was education. It was less feasible to assess bi-directional relations between education and hospitalizations since educational levels after age 30 are typically stable. We did, however, model a bi-directional relationship between early-life hospitalizations and education, and hospitalizations later in life, in the younger cohort. These results indicated a clear bi-directional relationship also between early-life health pathways and education. Taken together the between-person estimates from the CLPM were consistent with our second hypothesis ( H2 ) wherein we hypothesized that the association between indicators of socioeconomic position and health was bi-directional. This was further supported by the results from the RI-CLPM in the younger cohort, which showed support for within-person estimates in both directions. In the older cohort, however, the within-person path coefficients were greatly attenuated for paths going in the direction from income to hospitalizations. We discuss this further below.
The last hypothesis ( H3 ) concerned the life-course variability in the bi-directional relation between socioeconomic position and health. We found support for variability in the association at several stages of the life-course.
In the older cohort the most striking pattern was that after the cohort aged into the Swedish retirement age (with mean pension age 64.5 in 2016 ( Pensionsmyndigheten, 2018 )), the association from hospitalizations to income was first weakened and then were fully attenuated in both models. The relationship between income and subsequent hospitalizations was more complicated. The CLPM indicated a relatively strong and increasing association with increased age, while the results from the RI-CLPM showed inconsistent results in the older cohort. The within-person association was strong for income at ages 55–63 and 60–68 predicting hospitalizations at ages 60–68 and 65–73; at the other measurement periods, there were small or no within-person associations between income and subsequent hospitalizations. The strong within-person association from income to subsequent hospitalization around retirement age could be caused by a drop in income as a result of early retirement, which in turn could have been caused by poorer health status that is not captured by the health measure in our models. Thus, the observed association between income and hospitalizations around retirement ages does not necessarily indicate that changes in income at these ages have direct consequences for subsequent health. In contrast, the stronger between-person estimates for income predicting subsequent health shows that persons with lower relative income position have poorer health also in old age. Together, these results could indicate that, among older people in Sweden, the relationship between income and poor health is mostly a manifestation of the relationship between lifetime socioeconomic position and health rather than a causal effect of income on health at these ages.
Our empirical approach to examining the entire adult life-course is similar to that by Hoffmann et al. (2018) with the addition that we estimated both between-person and within-person effects in our cross lagged panel models. The results are similar to the extent that both studies found support for pathways from both indicators of socioeconomic position to health as well as the reversed pathway in young adulthood and in the transition from education and onto the labor market. However, while Hoffmann et al. (2018) found equal support for both pathways, we observed that the pathways going from poor health to socioeconomic position was stronger in early life compared to the reversed pathway. One reason for this discrepancy could be the differing operationalization of health. Hoffmann et al. (2018) used retrospective and self-reported measures, while in this study we used hospitalizations as a proxy for poor health. Hospitalizations in early-life, which in this study represent ages 20–28 in the younger cohort, is likely an indicator of more detrimental health problems compared to self-reported measures. Moreover, early-life circumstances in this study are measured at a later age than those assessed in the study by Hoffmann et al. (2018) .
In the older cohort, we found strong indications of a weakened association from hospitalizations to income in older ages, and we were able to pinpoint this weakened association to ages when the cohort transitioned into retirement. This finding is consistent with findings by Hoffmann et al. (2018) that reported a weak link between prior health and socioeconomic position in old age. This is likely a consequence of the weakened connection between health and earnings after retirement: at this point in the life-course, taxable incomes are to a large part determined by previous income from work. However, the timing of retirement and the effect that health has on this transition is complex. Health is related to working capacity, and people in better health retire later than those with reduced ability to work ( Mein et al., 2000 ; Oksanen and Virtanen, 2012 ). Thus, the post-retirement effect of health on income is likely weak, but the transition into this state is very much dependent on previous health status.
The findings related to socioeconomic position and health in older ages relate to a broader debate on whether inequalities in health remain, decrease, or increase among older persons ( Rehnberg et al., 2019 ). The observed magnitude of health inequalities in old age seems to be dependent on which indicator of socioeconomic position is used as well as the type of health outcome studied. For example, income inequalities in mortality generally show that both absolute inequalities and relative inequalities persist in old age, but in age groups above 80 relative inequalities tend to decrease ( Huisman, 2004 ; Kibele et al., 2013 ; Rehnberg et al., 2019 ). We did not assess the magnitude of inequalities in this study, but the results indicated that the between-person association for relative income position and poor health was maintained in all age categories and was stronger among those aged above 60. These results thus support previous findings of a maintained association between relative income position and mortality well after retirement age.
Taken together, our findings outline an interplay between socioeconomic position and health throughout the life-course. Changes in this dynamic relation occur primarily when individuals age into or out of age-stratified institutions, such as in the transition from education to the labor market and around the retirement age. Lastly, our results highlight the importance of considering effects at both the between- and within-person level, especially so among older persons, where income change had little effect on subsequent health.
We used observational data to model the relationship between income and health at different time points using a cross-lagged design and complemented the analyses with a random intercept model that estimated the pure within-person autoregressive and cross-lagged effects. The between-person approach is less suitable for causal interpretation of mechanisms that operate at the individual level and can in this study instead be viewed as a reflection of the social gradient in health. In the crossed part of the model, the within-person estimates showed to what extent deviations from a person-specific mean in income were accompanied by deviations from a person-specific mean in hospitalizations and vice versa ( Mund and Nestler, 2019 ). This approach to analyzing longitudinal data more closely correspond to the theoretical understanding of how the causal processes occur between socioeconomic position and health at the individual level. While this method avoids some of the issues of confounding and selection, several unobserved factors that we could not control for may influence the estimated pathways. Other study designs that are specifically constructed to reduce such biases, for example, randomized control trials or, more commonly in the field of social epidemiology , natural experiments or mendelian randomization , are supposed to maximize internal validity in order to convincingly determine the presence of a causal effect from a pre-defined exposure to a pre-defined outcome (see for example Deaton and Cartwright, 2018 ). By analyzing the effects of exogenous events that randomly distribute individuals into exposure categories, these designs are effective in determining specific causal effects of known risk factors . As a consequence, however, such designs cannot capture bi-directional relationships, for example, the one between socioeconomic position and health. Further, the focus on internal validity in these designs often has consequences for external validity. Several of these designs rely on extraordinary events to create a random assignment of exposures, for example, school reforms ( Lager and Torssander, 2012 ), lotteries ( Cesarini et al., 2016 ), or earthquakes ( Cipollone and Rosolia, 2016 ). While there are valuable lessons from these approaches, the extraordinary nature of these examples makes it difficult to discern the bearing these results have on the social gradient in health that emerges through common events and processes in which individuals are not randomly distributed and, to make things more complicated, exercise purposive agency. The self-selection that these studies work hard to exclude is an important part of the process through which social inequalities are generated and sustained. Despite probable biases due to unobserved factors, we would argue that the results from this study reflect a realistic notion of the association between health and social position that stems from intertwined social and biological processes over the life-course.
The empirical approach that we employed in this study analyses the life-course as path dependent events and states, where we assume that earlier events affect subsequent events. This analytical approach does not specifically consider life altering turning points or critical periods that affect individuals and that might alter individual trajectories. For example, it is not uncommon to examine the effect that health shocks have on the capacity to work and for earnings ( O'Donnell et al., 2015 ). Such abrupt and serious life-events can disrupt expected life-course trajectories and is likely an important contributor to health inequalities that our models do not quantify.
We applied a cohort approach, which makes it difficult to disentangle period effects from age-specific patterns. While we do observe the two cohort at some overlapping ages, they are born 27 years apart. Specific period effects, for example educational reform or a change in the pension system, are likely to influence individuals differently depending on what age they are at the time and it therefore is difficult to meaningfully compare estimates between the two cohorts. We have instead opted focus on within-cohort patterns.
In order to determine the public health and clinical impact of an effect it has often been suggested to present both relative and absolute effect measures ( King et al., 2012 ; Schechtman, 2002 ; Siegerink and Rohmann, 2018 ). In this study, we present standardized coefficients to investigate the relative strength of the relations estimated in the models. The downside of this choice is that standardized coefficients do not lend themselves to clear interpretations of effect size, and in terms of assessing the public health impact, it is unintuitive to interpret both exposure and outcome as changes in standard deviations . Despite the reduced interpretability of an absolute impact on health inequalities that standardized coefficients have, we believe that this approach was warranted given the objective of this study.

Section: 5. Conclusions

Over the past decades, social inequalities have been increasingly understood as the result of a series of dynamic interdependencies between social circumstances, economic conditions , and health throughout the life-course. Our study adds to this understanding, both conceptually and empirically. We have shown that there are indeed processes of mutual influence and that these patterns are linked to age-dependent institutional transitions throughout the life-course. These findings point towards the importance of theoretical frameworks that are capable of incorporating the interplay between social, economic, and biological processes over the life-course.
Given the complex interdependences that we observed, a singular focus of finding causal estimates for one direction of the relationship between socioeconomic position and health can only partially help us to understand health inequalities. In terms of policymaking, breaking the links between poor health and low income is important irrespective of which causal direction is stronger. For example, sickness insurance programs can reduce the economic consequences of becoming ill, and conversely, minimum income levels and other types of social protection schemes can reduce the consequences of low income.

Section: Credit author statement

Johan Rehnberg: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Visualization, Olof Östergren: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Ingrid Esser: Conceptualization, Writing - Review & Editing, Olle Lundberg: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare no conflicting interests.

Section: Acknowledgement

This work was supported by grants 75970 and 83540 from NordForsk and 2018-01922 from The Swedish Research Council .
