Title: Gender inequality and mammography screening: Does living with a partner improve women's mammography uptake?


Abstract: Abstract

Macrolevel gender inequality is defined as the unequal distribution of power and resources between men and women shaped by macrolevel social structures and institutions. An emerging line of health research is emphasising its negative consequences on women's health and healthcare access. The present study examines how gender inequality contexts affect women's mammography screening uptake. It adopts a macrosociological and institutionalist approach on preventive healthcare use and compares women who live with a partner with those who do not. This is the first study to test the effect of macrolevel gender inequality on mammography uptake across the 26 Swiss cantons (i.e. regions). The Swiss cantons' autonomy to manage their political and healthcare systems, as provided by the federal system, offers an ideal setting for the comparative analysis of macrolevel factors. Data on 9724 women aged 50–70 from the Swiss Health Interview Survey (waves 2007, 2012 and 2017) is analysed. Multilevel logistic models estimate two canton-level indicators of gender inequality, the gender gaps in time use and full-time employment, and their association with mammography uptake, controlling for women's socioeconomic and demographic characteristics, health status and healthcare use. Cross-level interactions assess how these indicators moderate the mammography uptake of women living with and without a partner. Results show that in cantons with higher gender inequality, women have a lower probability of mammography uptake. Women who live with a partner have a higher mammography uptake than those who do not. However, this advantage is moderated by canton-level gender inequality, namely, women who live with a partner in more gender unequal cantons have a lower mammography uptake than their counterparts who reside in more gender equal cantons. Results support the hypothesis that macrolevel gender inequality moderates women's preventive healthcare uptake, from an institutionalist approach.

Section: 1. Introduction

Research has increasingly evidenced the effects of macrolevel factors, such as welfare state characteristics, income inequality, national income or public health expenditure, on health and health inequalities ( Bergqvist et al., 2013 ; Brennenstuhl et al., 2012 ; Gkiouleka et al., 2018 ). However, in the field of cancer screening participation, research has primarily attended to individual-level factors of participation, such as socioeconomic and demographic factors ( Priaulx et al., 2020 ; Sarma, 2015 ), and has overlooked the role of macrolevel structures and institutions in which individuals are embedded.
Recent studies have pointed out the importance of a macrosociological approach which accounts for institutional effects on cancer screening uptake ( Jolidon et al., 2021 ; Willems et al., 2020 ), inspired by an ‘institutional turn’ in health sociology ( Beckfield et al., 2015 ). They bring individual-level factors of cancer screening uptake under the scrutiny of a macrosociological lens in order to examine how healthcare system features, social policies and contexts may affect individuals' use of preventive healthcare .
European cross-national research has mainly focused, at the macro-level, on organised screening programmes and how these moderate socioeconomic inequalities in screening participation ( Palencia et al., 2010 ; Walsh et al., 2011 ; Willems and Bracke, 2018 ). Two studies have addressed further macrolevel factors and showed that gender inequality and unsupportive social welfare policies may negatively affect cancer screening uptake ( Jolidon et al., 2021 ; Willems et al., 2020 ). They stressed that if these factors were not taken into account, they could hinder screening programmes’ potential to enhance access and mitigate inequalities in screening uptake.
Results from cross-national comparative research on cancer screening uptake are affected by considerable levels of unobserved heterogeneity. This stems from the idiosyncrasies of national contexts characterised by differing healthcare systems and welfare policies. Thus, the present study takes advantage of the context of Switzerland and its 26 cantons (regions) to further inspect the weight of macrosocial structures on cancer screening uptake. As sub-national units of analysis, the Swiss cantons are less heterogeneous than countries, since they share more similarities in their healthcare and welfare systems than European countries, thus reducing unobserved confounding factors ( Epple et al., 2014 ; Snyder, 2001). Meanwhile, the cantons possess their own distinctive features and are characterised by different levels of gender inequality shaped by local social policies and sociocultural features ( Armingeon et al., 2004 ; Nollert and Gasser, 2017 ). That is, within the scope of action provided by the Swiss federal system, the cantons independently manage their own healthcare and welfare systems.
Since the Swiss cantons autonomously manage their healthcare system, there is no nationwide organised mammography programme in Switzerland and only 12 out of 26 cantons have implemented mammography programmes at different timepoints from 1999 to 2017 ( Bulliard et al., 2021 ). In cantons with a mammography programme, eligible women are invited every 2 years for a mammography; whereas in cantons without a programme, screening uptake is “opportunistic”, that is, it is based on women's initiative to undertake a mammography and doctors' recommendation to patients. There are no mandatory breast cancer screening recommendations issued by Swiss public health authorities. However, the Swiss Cancer League (a not-for-profit foundation) has recommended mammography screening since 2000, and the mandatory health insurance scheme (LAMal) has covered the cost of a mammography every two years for patients since 1996 in its benefit basket ( Cullati et al., 2009 ; OECD/WHO, 2011 ). These institutions have thus followed the international recommendation of a mammography screening every two years for secondary prevention, which was also published in Swiss medical journals ( Cornuz et al., 2010 ). Apart from mammography, no other breast cancer screening methods have been endorsed by Swiss medical societies or the health insurance system for asymptomatic screening ( Delaloye et al., 2012 ).
Research has shown that screening and early detection can reduce social and geographic inequalities in breast cancer survival ( Tabar et al., 2021 ). It is thus essential to study inequalities in mammography uptake, particularly in a country like Switzerland where only regional mammography programmes are implemented, opportunistic and organised screening coexist, and cantons show varying levels of macrolevel gender inequality. Macrolevel gender inequality is a macrostructural social dimension which deserves more attention since it is a key social determinant of women's health and healthcare uptake ( King et al., 2020 ). At the individual level, the present study considers that living with a spouse or intimate partner is an important source of social support, which shapes individual social relations, and plays an essential role in preventive healthcare behaviours ( Han et al., 2019 ).
While the Swiss cantons offer an ideal setting to examine macrosocial factors, no previous study has taken advantage of this backdrop to formally test the effect of the cantons' macrosocial structure on mammography screening uptake using multilevel modelling . Such modelling strategy allows not only to analyse contextual factors but also how these interact with individual-level factors. Therefore, the central aim of this study is to examine the effect of macrolevel gender inequality on mammography screening uptake, paying attention to the implementation of regional mammography screening programmes and, at the individual level, to women's cohabitation with a (marital) partner.

Section: 2. Background

Recent scholarship has highlighted the effect of macrolevel gender inequality on women's health and healthcare access ( Homan, 2019 ; Rapp et al., 2021 ). It has emphasised that, beyond individual and interactional levels, social structures and institutions shape the unequal distribution of power and resources between men and women at the macro-level. Since social contexts shape gender arrangements, it is essential to study how varying levels of gender inequality affect individuals' health across contexts.
In this vein, Willems et al. (2020) showed that macrolevel gender inequality negatively affects women's cancer screening participation. They drew on Bird and Rieker's (2008) sociology of constrained choices which was developed to explain how policy, community, work and family contexts shape gender differences in health and individuals' health decisions and priorities. This approach brought evidence that women are in better health when they are exposed to policies that focus on their political participation, autonomy, and family roles, and when they benefit from more power at the macro-level ( Borrell et al., 2014 ; Kawachi et al., 1999 ; Palencia et al., 2014 ). Moreover, their use of health services is also enhanced when they experience higher levels of autonomy and control over their decisions ( Osamor and Grady, 2016 ). Conversely, social contexts and policies unfavourable to women may constrain their ability to prioritise healthy behaviours. These restrict women's agency in health decisions and confront them with competing choices between health and other priorities, such as family responsibilities ( Bird and Rieker, 2008 ). In the same line, research has shown that when gender inequalities are perpetuated through reproductive health , family, employment and political participation policies and conditions, these may worsen women's health through mechanisms such as stress, discrimination, financial difficulties, violence, double burden of work, and time pressure ( Borrell et al., 2014 ).
Research revealed varying levels of gender inequality across Switzerland's cantons ( Bühler, 2001 ; Nollert and Gasser, 2017 ). These differences were shown to be shaped by welfare policies and cultural differences between the cantons. That is, the Swiss cantons are linguistically, politically, religiously and culturally diverse and are autonomous political entities within a federal system. They have marked differences in family and social policies ( Armingeon et al., 2004 ) and in cultural family models ( Pfau-Effinger, 2005 ). Hence, a combination of economic, political, and socio-cultural processes contribute to defining “cantonal gender arrangements” ( Bühler, 2001 ; Epple et al., 2014 ) and thus a single social or policy determinant cannot fully account for cross-canton differences in gender inequality. The Swiss cantons provide an interesting setting to assess the effect of gender inequality on women's preventive healthcare use, such as mammography uptake. However, the inter-cantonal variation in welfare policies is complex and difficult to capture through indicators due to shared power and overlapping social policies between cantonal and federal levels. This is also why it is difficult to consistently classify cantonal welfare regimes as liberal, conservative, or social democratic and compare them ( Armingeon et al., 2004 ).
Considering these challenges, in the present study, the gender gap in time use is used as a macrolevel indicator of gender inequality across the Swiss cantons. It measures the gap between men and women in the time they allocate to unpaid work (domestic tasks), that is, the sexual division of unpaid work. This indicator was shown to capture overall gender inequality levels ( Blumberg and Coleman, 1989 ; Fuwa, 2004 ) as well as to account for inter-cantonal levels of gender inequality in Switzerland ( Epple et al., 2014 ). It is particularly relevant since, despite women entering the labour market in large numbers over the past decades, a gendered division of labour has persisted and remains a barrier to gender equality in the labour market ( Gornick and Meyers, 2009 ; Hook, 2010 ). A second contextual indicator of gender inequality is used: the gender gap in full-time employment. Although levels of women's workforce participation are high in Switzerland, the country is amongst those with the highest female part-time employment rates ( Buchmann et al., 2010 ). This reality reflects a gendered organisation of work based on a traditional sexual division of labour whereby men concentrate in their full-time jobs with prospects of career development while their partners take on part-time jobs which they can accommodate with care for the family ( Acker, 1990 ). The cantons' labour market, gender culture and welfare provision were shown to affect women's decisions to work full-time, part-time or stay out of the labour force ( Buchmann et al., 2010 ). Thus, the weight of these structural conditions evidences the fact that women's engagement in full-time paid work is not simply a matter of work-lifestyle choices.
As context-level indicators, both the gender gap in time use and full-time employment aim at capturing the extent to which macrolevel institutions and cultural settings of the cantons promote women's empowerment. Namely, the extent to which women are supported by institutions and the social context in which they are embedded. Moreover, they reflect the exchange patterns and allocations of resources taking place within households. These directly relate to gender relations of power, control and authority, and have implications for women's health ( Moss, 2002 ). These indicators have the advantage of being relevant to assess variations in the Swiss cantons' context introduced earlier, as well as in women's everyday lives in their specific contexts. They also offer more specific measurements than composite indexes, such as the Gender Inequality Index, which combine several indicators of distinct gender inequality dimensions. In sum, they capture how gender power relations and inequalities across the Swiss cantons are shaped by each canton's welfare provision and sociocultural features.
With the gender gaps in time use and full-time employment as macrolevel indicators, this study focuses on a key gender inequality determinant: the sexual division of labour ( Gornick and Meyers, 2009 ). Along the constrained choices perspective ( Bird and Rieker, 2008 ), this study considers that this determinant shapes women's access to resources and power and may constrain their ability to make health choices and access healthcare. The present study thus expands on the constrained choices framework by conceptualising the effect of unequal sexual division of labour at the macro-level on preventive healthcare uptake. That is, macrosocial structures where women are restrained in their opportunities for employment and career development, face a higher burden of unpaid (domestic) work, as well as hegemonic gender norms sanctioning traditional work and family roles, may also have implications for their health.
Beyond contextual influences, living with a (marital) partner is known to positively affect individual health status and health behaviours, and was also shown to favour a woman's likelihood to undergo mammography screening ( Hanske et al., 2016 , Jolidon et al., 2022 ). There is a long history of research which has shown the beneficial effects of marriage and partnership on health ( Umberson et al., 2010 ). Those who have a (marital) partner benefit from mutual social support as well as more resources which favour health-enhancing behaviours ( Lewis et al., 2006 ; Liu, 2012 ; Meyler et al., 2007 ; Wilson, 2002 ). Health-related social control theories have put forward that partners influence each other's health behaviour and contribute to keeping their partner healthier ( Umberson, 1992 ). The positive effects of marriage and partnership on preventive healthcare and cancer screening uptake were also highlighted in previous research ( Falba and Sindelar, 2008 ; Han et al., 2019 ; Hanske et al., 2016 ).
Nevertheless, the alleged universal protective nature of marriage and partnership was also challenged and research stressed that this effect should be contextualised ( Carr and Springer, 2010 ; Missinne et al., 2013 ). In this sense, the present study argues that the positive effect of living with a (marital) partner needs to be apprehended within broader social and cultural contexts. These contexts delineate both the macro gender arrangements and social norms which affect the extent to which living in a couple can influence women's preventive health behaviours. This approach is consistent with recent theories which conceptualise gender beyond individual attributes in a multilevel framework where institutions and individuals, i.e. macro and micro-level processes, interact and structure gender-based health opportunities and constraints ( Homan, 2019 ). With its corresponding multilevel statistical technique, this perspective is able to simultaneously consider different social system levels, isolate each level's effect, and examine how their interactions produce health inequalities.
At the individual-level, the present study focuses on women's partnership and cohabitation status since it is the primary site where, through everyday interactions between (marital) partners, gender is socially (re-)produced through the sexual division of labour and dominant gender norms. This allows to examine the effect of ‘living with or without a partner’ – an individual-level factor of mammography uptake – situated within specific gender inequality contexts. This predictor is considered to be more relevant to health behaviours than ‘marital status’ since it better captures the daily social support and household setting in which women are embedded, as suggested by the literature ( Hughes and Waite, 2002 ; Lund et al., 2002 ).
Only a few studies have used multilevel models to examine macrolevel determinants of mammography uptake across countries ( Jolidon et al., 2021 ; Willems et al., 2020 ). Such models have not been applied to examine context-level determinants of mammography uptake across the Swiss cantons, except for studies which have analysed cantons' mammography programmes effect ( Jolidon et al., 2022 , Ulyte et al., 2020 ). Multilevel analysis has become increasingly popular in social epidemiology and quantitative sociological research to analyse data affected by hierarchies ( Bell et al., 2019 ). When data is hierarchically structured and observations can be nested in higher-level units (or ‘clusters’), such as countries or cantons, observations which belong to the same context may share similarities. Such dependencies between observations from the same cluster violate the regression analysis assumption of uncorrelated error terms across observations. If this source of dependence is not accounted for, standard errors will be incorrect and lead to anticonservative and invalid statistical inference ( Heisig et al., 2017 ; Moulton, 1986 ). The multilevel design addresses this dependency issue by modelling the nested structure of the data. It does so by introducing random effects at the regression's higher-level and partitioning the unexplained residual variance into the higher and lower-level variance.
Multilevel models allow to statistically infer the effect of context-level variables because they model the higher-level (contextual) variance. Fixed-effect models – which are also used to control for context-level unobserved heterogeneity – do not allow to estimate further variables at the context-level since this technique controls out all context-level heterogeneity (using dummy variables for all higher-level units). In this framework, higher-level units are treated as unrelated entities, which exist independently, and thus important information is lost from the model ( Bell and Jones, 2014 ). Meanwhile, multilevel regressions explicitly model the higher-level variance, rather than removing it, which also allows to ‘shrink’ higher-level residuals towards their mean producing more reliable estimates than fixed-effect coefficients. Finally, cross-level interaction effects between context and individual-level variables can also be analysed with these models.
The following hypotheses are based on the background of this study: 1) In more gender unequal cantons, women are expected to have a lower probability of mammography uptake since such contexts constrain women's preventive health uptake. 2) The effect of gender inequality on mammography uptake is expected to be stronger in cantons which have not implemented mammography screening programmes compared to those which have implemented such programmes. 3) Women living with a partner are expected to have a higher mammography uptake likelihood than those who do not live with a partner. However, their mammography uptake is expected to be lower in contexts of higher gender inequality compared to their counterparts who reside in more gender equal cantons (moderation effect).

Section: 3. Data and methods

The Swiss Health Interview Survey (SHIS) is a cross-sectional survey implemented every five years from 1992 to 2017, it is nationally representative and based on a stratified random selection of residents older than 14 years of age ( Swiss Federal Statistical Office (FSO), 2018 ). The present study examines the three most recent SHIS survey waves (2007, 2012 and 2017) which provide information on the predictor of interest ‘living with/without a partner’. The three waves were pooled and the study sample restricted to 50 to 70 year-old women (N = 11,249), following the recommended screening age of the Swiss cantons' mammography programmes. After excluding respondents who had missing data on the dependent and independent variables the sample contains 9897 women.
In the SHIS, women were asked if they ‘ever had a mammography’ (yes, no) and, if they answered ‘yes’, which was the month and year of their last mammographic screening. Two binary dependent variables are computed: ‘up-to-date screening’ (1 = screened within the past 2 years, 0 = screened more than 2 years ago), to examine women who had a mammography within the time interval recommended by Switzerland's mammography programmes, and ‘never-screening’ (1 = never screened, 0 = ever screened), to attend to those who never had a mammography. Cancer screening participation studies have primarily focused on ‘up-to-date screening’, however, studies have pointed out that ‘never-screeners’ should be taken into account since they may have different screening participation determinants than those who have already participated in screening ( Jolidon et al., 2020 ; Marlow et al., 2017 ).
The mammography screening programmes implementation across cantons and years is examined with a binary canton-level variable coded as, (1) ‘programme’, if a canton had implemented a mammography programme the year before a SHIS survey wave, and (0) ‘no programme’, if no programme was implemented (see Table S1 in supplementary materials).
The two (canton-level) indicators of macrolevel gender inequality, the gender gaps in time use and full-time employment, are computed based on the Swiss Labour Force Survey (SLFS) ( Swiss Federal Statistical Office, 2017 ). The gender time use gap is computed based on self-reported time-use questions on paid and unpaid work. Time use is first calculated separately for men and women of working age (15–64 year-old), in each canton, as the unpaid work volume divided by the total (paid and unpaid) work volume. The gender time use gap is then calculated as the difference between men and women in their time use proportions, with higher values indicating more gender inequality. This indicator has the advantage of taking into account both paid and unpaid workloads, in the sexual division of unpaid work ( Epple et al., 2014 ). The gender gap in full-time employment is calculated as the proportion of men with full-time employment minus that of women. Both canton-level gender inequality indicators are measured at three timepoints preceding the three respective SHIS survey waves, in order to account for potential gender inequality time trends. The SLFS collected employment information every year. Thus, the gender gap in full-time employment is calculated separately in three SLFS waves preceding each SHIS wave (e.g. in 2003, 2004 and 2005; 2008, 2009 and 2010; etc.) and then averaged. This procedure improves estimations and is also required since each survey wave has its own post-stratification weights and cannot be pooled ( Swiss Federal Statistical Office (FSO), 2020 ). The SLFS collected time use information in 2000, 2004, 2007, 2010, 2013 and 2016. Hence, the gender time use gap is measured by averaging two survey waves at three timepoints, 2000–2004, 2007–2010 and 2013–2016. The gender time use gap is 22.61% in average, which corresponds to the working time proportion men should shift from paid to unpaid work, or women from unpaid to paid work, in order to close the time use gap. The gender gap in full-time employment is 46%. The two gender inequality indicators are measured as continuous and centred around their grand mean.
The individual-level predictor of interest, living with/without a partner, is measured as, (0) ‘living with a partner’ and (1) ‘living without a partner’, based on the information collected by the SHIS. Individual-level variables shown to be related to mammography uptake ( Cullati et al., 2018 ; Sarma, 2015 ) are included as control variables, based on their availability in the SHIS: education level (primary, upper secondary, tertiary), employment status (full-time, part-time, non-employed), income (continuous and weighted according to the modified OECD equivalence scale), area of residence (urban, rural), linguistic region of residence (German, French, Italian), age (continuous), self-rated health (continuous from very good to very bad), and general practitioner or gynaecologist visits in the last 12 months (two and more, one, none). Descriptive statistics of individual and macrolevel variables are reported in Table S2 (supplementary materials).
Multilevel logistic models are performed with individuals (level-1) nested in canton-year (level-2) clusters, i.e. each level-2 cluster combines a specific canton in a specific survey wave year. This design takes into account possible similarities among women from the same canton-year cluster, as well as the fact that cantons implemented mammography programmes at different timepoints between 2007 and 2017, and that gender inequality may have evolved over this period. The three survey waves (2007, 2012 and 2017) are pooled and provide 78 canton-year clusters (26 cantons x 3 survey waves) at the model level-2 (see Table S3 in supplementary materials for an overview of the canton-year clusters). Four cantons are excluded from the analyses (Obwalden, Nidwalden, Glarus and Appenzell Innerrhoden) as some of their canton-year clusters have a low number of cases (n < 10). Note that these cantons are small, the number of individual observations excluded with these is n = 173 (1.7% of the study sample), and they have not implemented mammography programmes. Thus, the final sample analysed contains 9724 women nested in 66 canton-year clusters. All models are adjusted for time (survey wave dummy variables) in order to control for time-variant unobserved heterogeneity which may affect mammography uptake. All models are performed for both ‘up-to-date screening’ and ‘never-screening’ variables separately. The analyses are conducted in Stata 16.
An ‘empty-model’ (model 0) with a random intercept for canton-year clusters is first examined to test if there are significant differences in mammography uptake across cantons and survey waves, using a likelihood-ratio test. In model 1, the association of mammography programme and screening uptake is modelled adjusting for all individual-level covariates listed out in the previous section, as well as for time. Models 2 analyse the two macrolevel gender inequality variables in separate models. The model fit following their inclusion in the model is examined with a likelihood-ratio test. Variance partitioning coefficients (VPC) and median odds ratios (MOR) are calculated to estimate the higher-level residual heterogeneity, that is, the proportion of canton-level variance left unexplained by the models, and to depict the relative importance of macrolevel factors. The VPC quantifies the proportion of level-2 variance over the total model variance and is calculated with the ‘latent variable method’ ( Merlo et al., 2006 ). Since the VPC can vary based on the outcome prevalence, the MOR is also reported for better comparisons between the two outcomes. The MOR represents the median increase in the likelihood of mammography uptake from the canton-year cluster with the lowest to the one with the highest screening uptake likelihood. A higher MOR indicates larger cross-cluster differences. Models 3a and 3b examine the macrolevel gender inequality variables in the two subsamples of cantons which have and have not implemented mammography programmes. Finally, cross-level interactions between ‘living with/without a partner’ and macrolevel gender inequality variables are analysed in models 4. Based on these interactions, predicted probabilities were graphed for a better representation of how gender inequality moderates the mammography uptake of women who live with and without a partner.

Section: 4. Results

The model with a random intercept for canton-year clusters (model 0) performed better than the one without random intercept (up-to-date screening: χ 2 (1) = 1075.54, p < 0.000; never-screening: χ 2 (1) = 485.40, p < 0.000) revealing significant differences between cantons and years in mammography uptake. The total variance attributed to canton-year clusters is 15.7% and 14.8% for up-to-date screening and never-screening respectively ( Table 1 ). The MOR indicates that an individual from the canton-year cluster with the highest up-to-date and never screening probability has (in median) 2.108 and 2.058 times the odds of up-to-date and never screening, respectively, compared to an individual from the canton-year cluster with the lowest up-to-date and never screening probability. Table 1 . Associations of macro and individual level variables with up-to-date mammography uptake and never-screening, results of logistic multilevel model analysis, odds ratios and standard errors (N1 = 9724; N2 = 66). Empty Cell Up-to-date screening Never-screening OR (SE) MOR VPC OR (SE) MOR VPC Model 0 (intercept-only) Level-2 (canton-year) variance 0.611 (0.115) 2.108 0.157 0.572 (0.115) 2.058 0.148 Model 1 (adjusted model) Living with/without partner (ref: living with partner) Living without partner 0.744*** (0.037) 1.463*** (0.088) Screening programme (ref: no programme) programme 2.490*** (0.236) 1.231 0.014 0.592*** (0.076) 1.353 0.030 Model 2 (adjusted models) Gender time use gap 0.979* (0.009) 1.216 0.013 1.037** (0.013) 1.314 0.024 Gender full-time employment gap 0.984* (0.008) 1.223 0.013 1.028** (0.011) 1.326 0.026 Model 3a: screening programme subsample (N1 = 4268; N2 = 26) Gender time use gap 0.979 (0.018) 1.218 0.013 0.993 (0.026) 1.285 0.021 Gender full-time employment gap 0.966 (0.010) 1.222 0.013 1.007 (0.014) 1.293 0.022 Model 3b: no screening programme subsample (N1 = 5456; N2 = 40) Gender time use gap 0.984 (0.010) 1.157 0.007 1.049*** (0.015) 1.287 0.021 Gender full-time employment gap 0.966** (0.011) 1.142 0.006 1.054*** (0.016) 1.301 0.023 Significance levels: *p value ≤ 0.05, **p value ≤ 0.01, ***p value ≤ 0.001 . MOR = median odds ratio, VPC = variance partitioning coefficient . Note: Models 1, 2 and 3 are adjusted for all individual-level covariates (education level, employment status, income, area of residence, linguistic region, age, self-rated health, a GP or gynaecologist visit in the past 12 months), mammography screening programme availability and time (survey wave).
Model 1 ( Table 1 ) adjusts for all individual-level (level-1) covariates, as well as for the macro-level (level-2) screening programme and time variables (full table in supplementary materials, Table S4 ). The VPC reduces to 1.4% and 3.0% for up-to-date and never-screening showing, firstly, that the unexplained context-level heterogeneity is higher in never-screening than in up-to-date screening, and secondly, that individual and macrolevel variables explain most of the between-canton differences in mammography screening uptake. Nevertheless, the level-2 variance remains different from zero for both outcomes (up-to-date screening: μ 2 u0 = 95%CI [0.023–0.095]; never-screening: μ 2 u0 = 95%CI [0.054–0.187]). Model 1 reveals that, compared to women who live with a partner, those who do not live with a partner have a lower up-to-date screening uptake probability and a higher never-screening probability. At the canton level, mammography screening programmes both increase women's up-to-date mammography uptake and reduce never-screening.
Models 2 examine the effect of each macrolevel gender inequality predictor on mammography uptake outcomes in separate models. A canton's higher gender inequality is significantly associated with lower up-to-date screening and higher never-screening, as both gender inequality variables show, which confirms hypothesis 1. Likelihood ratio tests showed that both gender inequality variables improved the model fit for never-screening (gender time use gap: χ 2 (1) = 8.21, p = 0.004; gender full-time employment gap: χ 2 (1) = 6.82, p = 0.009) and up-to-date screening uptake (gender time use gap: χ 2 (1) = 4.94, p = 0.026; gender full-time employment gap: χ 2 (1) = 4.50, p = 0.034).
Models 3a and 3b replicate Model 2 in the canton-year subsamples which had and had not implemented mammography programmes. Hypothesis 2 is confirmed as the effect of gender inequality variables on screening uptake observed in the total sample (model 2) vanishes in the ‘screening programme’ subsample, while this effect remains and has gained stronger significance in the ‘no screening programme’ subsample, except for gender time use gap which is no longer associated with up-to-date screening uptake.
Table 2 presents cross-level interactions between living with/without a partner and macrolevel gender inequality variables (models 4). The interaction terms indicate whether the effect of living with/without a partner on mammography uptake differs across the varying levels of cantons' gender inequality, in other words, whether the association between macrolevel gender inequality and mammography uptake varies for women who live with and without a partner. The ORs of the macrolevel gender inequality variables (the ‘main effects’) represent the effect of these variables on the mammography uptake of women ‘living with a partner’, namely, the reference category of the ‘living with/without a partner’ variable. Results confirm hypothesis 3: women living with a partner have a significantly lower up-to-date screening and higher never-screening probability if they live in more gender unequal cantons, as the main effects of both gender inequality variables reveal. As significant interaction terms show, difference in never-screening probabilities between women who live with and without a partner diminishes in more gender unequal cantons. This interaction effect is not found for up-to-date screening uptake. Table 2 . Cross-level interactions between macrolevel gender inequality and ‘living with/without a partner’ variables in their effect on mammography uptake, results of logistic multilevel model analysis, odds ratios and standard errors (N1 = 9724; N2 = 66). Empty Cell Model 4 Up-to-date screening Never-screening Gender time use gap Gender full-time employment gap Gender time use gap Gender full-time employment gap OR (SE) OR (SE) OR (SE) OR (SE) Individual-level variables Living with/without partner (ref: living with partner) Living without partner 0.743*** (0.037) 0.744*** (0.037) 1.495*** (0.091) 1.516*** (0.093) Macro-level variables Gender time use gap 0.973** (0.010) 1.050*** (0.014) Gender full-time employment gap 0.980* (0.008) 1.046*** (0.012) Cross-level interactions GTUgap x living without partner 1.016 (0.011) 0.968** (0.012) GFTgap x living without partner 1.011 (0.009) 0.961** (0.012) Significance levels: *p value ≤ 0.05, **p value ≤ 0.01, ***p value ≤ 0.001 . GTUgap = gender time use gap, GFTgap = gender full-time employment gap . Note: Models are adjusted for all individual-level covariates (education level, employment status, income, area of residence, linguistic region, age, self-rated health, a GP or gynaecologist visit in the past 12 months), mammography screening programme availability and time (survey wave).
Fig. 1 , Fig. 2 depict the predicted probabilities of mammography uptake for women who live with and without a partner, based on the cross-level interactions of models 4. These help represent absolute levels of mammography uptake by combining interaction terms with their main effects. ORs of women who live with and without a partner are calculated by multiplying the interaction term by the OR of the macrolevel gender inequality variable (the main effect). In order to estimate the slopes’ significance of women who live with and without a partner in gender inequality variables, models were re-specified (tables not shown). ORs and p-values were noted on the graphs. The figures show that women who live with a partner have higher up-to-date screening and lower never-screening probabilities than those who do not live with a partner. In more unequal cantons, the never-screening probability of women who live with a partner significantly increases and their up-to-date screening decreases, as shown earlier with Table 2 results, while this is not the case for women who do not live with a partner. As a robustness check, all models were reassessed using Markov Chain Monte Carlo method (with starting values based on maximum likelihood estimation and 20,000 iterations following 2500 burn-in simulations) and yielded similar results. Download: Download high-res image (321KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Predicted probabilities of never screening for mammography by ‘living with/without a partner’ and macrolevel gender inequality indicators. Download: Download high-res image (501KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Predicted probabilities of up-to-date mammography uptake by ‘living with/without a partner’ and macrolevel gender inequality indicators.
Sensitivity analyses replicated the models excluding women who reported having received a cancer diagnosis in the past 12 months (n = 283; 2.9%), and who underwent mammography as a follow-up examination from a previous diagnosis or because they reported ‘pain’ or ‘symptoms’ (n = 1158; 11.9%) (tables available upon request to the author). This was possible since the SHIS waves 2007, 2012 and 2017 asked women the ‘reason’ for mammography screening. Results could be confirmed since associations remained robust and coefficients did not change in a way that would affect the conclusions of this study.

Section: 5. Discussion

This study examines how macrolevel gender inequality affects women's mammography screening uptake, taking into account whether or not they live with a partner as well as the presence of regional mammography screening programmes. It analyses the Swiss cantons' context, which entails less confounding factors than countries with diverging healthcare and welfare systems. Macro and individual level perspectives are combined since health sociology has stressed to role of macrolevel institutional arrangements in shaping individuals' health ( Beckfield et al., 2015 ; Gkiouleka et al., 2018 ). The multilevel models used allow to statistically test whether a context-level variable is associated with screening uptake, and whether it modifies an individual-level variable's effect.
The findings of this study contribute to contextualising mammography screening uptake within broader institutional structures, shaped by gender inequality and regional screening programmes, in which women are embedded. Firstly, it shows that women who live in more gender unequal cantons have a lower screening uptake probability for mammography, net of their socioeconomic status, age, linguistic region of residence, healthcare use and health status, as well as mammography programme availability in their canton of residence. This association is confirmed by two macrolevel gender inequality indicators, the gender gap in time use and full-time employment. It is in line with previous cross-national research, which showed that macrolevel gender inequality negatively affects women's cancer screening uptake ( Willems et al., 2020 ). A previous study showed that the Swiss cantons' supply of specialists is not related to mammography uptake ( Bahler et al., 2021 ) thus the regional density of specialists is unlikely to have confounded the findings of the present study. Moreover, multilevel models were adjusted for individuals' healthcare use, i.e. GP and gynaecologist visits.
The findings bring further empirical support to the argument that, in contexts of higher macrolevel gender inequality, institutions may restrict women's agency and opportunities in a way which affects their health decisions and preventive healthcare services use ( Bird and Rieker, 2008 ). In such contexts, women are confronted with a more gendered distribution of resources and agency caused by family, employment, and political participation policies and institutions ( Collins et al., 1993 ). This may entail more financial strain and burden of unpaid domestic work, fewer social interaction opportunities, as well as gender inequalities such as gender-segregated employment, lower wages than men for similar jobs and lower political participation ( Dahlin and Harkonen, 2013 ). As they face competing choices between health and other responsibilities, their ability to prioritise healthier behaviours and participate in cancer screening might be constrained.
Two outcomes are examined to inspect mammography uptake in this study: up-to-date screening (a mammography within the past two years) and never-screening. Associations between gender inequality and mammography uptake are more conclusive for never-screening, as pointed out by the coefficients' significance level. In this sense, a previous study stressed the importance of taking ‘never-screeners’ into account since they have different screening uptake determinants, and face greater barriers to screening participation, than those who have already participated in screening ( Jolidon et al., 2020 ). Hence, improving the never-screeners’ access to mammography may require specific public health strategies.
Secondly, the association between gender inequality and mammography uptake is no longer observed in the subsample of cantons which have implemented mammography screening programmes. The majority of these cantons are located in Switzerland's French-speaking region which is characterised by a more equalitarian “dual-breadwinner/external carer” family model compared to the German-speaking region where the “male breadwinner/female part-time carer” model is more prevalent ( Nollert and Gasser, 2017 ). Thus, it is not possible to disentangle the mammography programmes' effect from the gender culture of Swiss linguistic regions nor to claim that these programmes have mitigated the effect of gender inequality on mammography uptake. Nevertheless, crucially, among the cantons which have not implemented mammography programmes, and thus rely on opportunistic screening, higher gender inequality is strongly associated with higher never-screening – and with lower up-to-date screening as measured by the gender full-time employment gap. In this sense, research showed that opportunistic screening contexts involve more screening inequalities, inefficiencies and inconsistent quality ( IARC, 2017 ). While opportunistic screening depends on the individuals' initiative to participate, organised screening involves a population-based screening programme with explicit policies on the target population, screening tests and intervals; public funding to avoid out-of-pocket payment; a plan to systematically invite the eligible screening population; and structures for quality assurance, monitoring, and evaluation. These structures help reduce unequal access and improve efficiency from a public health perspective.
Thirdly, women who live with a partner have a higher mammography uptake than women who do not. As revealed by both outcomes, they are more ‘up-to-date’ in their mammography and have lower ‘never-screening’ than unpartnered women. It is worth noting that a previous study using the SHIS 2012 wave did not observe any effect of ‘marital status’ on mammography uptake, i.e. married women were not likely to undergo mammography more than unmarried women ( Eichholzer et al., 2016 ). The effect of ‘living with a partner’ revealed in the present study suggests that it might be a more relevant screening and health behaviour predictor, as it better captures the social context formed by the household in which women are embedded ( Hughes and Waite, 2002 ).
Nevertheless, results show that the positive effect of living with a partner on mammography uptake is moderated by canton-level gender inequality. Namely, women who live with a partner are more likely to never screen, or be off-schedule in their screening, if they reside in more gender unequal cantons. In contexts of higher gender inequality, the life of women who entered a relationship revolves more around the household sphere, with fewer opportunities for professional development and a more limited (or no) professional network. As they are more confined to the domestic sphere than their counterparts who live in more gender equal contexts, and may have less social interaction opportunities, it could be hypothesised that they are less exposed to information on preventive health, such as mammography. The moderation effect of macrolevel gender inequality suggest that macrosocial structures, formed by canton-level social policies, socio-cultural norms and gender arrangements, may constrain the agency of women who live with a partner and negatively affect their screening uptake. This is consistent with an institutional theory approach on health inequalities according to which social determinants of health are not only allocated at the individual-level as contexts and institutions also moderate how much individual resources matter for health ( Beckfield et al., 2015 ). Macrolevel social structures may thus shape the extent to which an individual factor, such as living with a partner, affects preventive healthcare use. Hence, if living with a partner can be beneficial for cancer screening uptake, an unfavourable institutional context may counter this benefit. In sum, consideration must be given to the social and institutional contexts in which men and women interactions take place, and gender power relations are shaped, since these can play a role in constraining or enhancing women's health behaviours and preventive healthcare access ( Reczek and Umberson, 2012 ).
Macrolevel gender inequality is examined through the lens of the sexual division of labour measured by two indicators, the gender gap in time use and full-time employment. Inequalities in household labour and labour market were shown to be at the heart of gender inequality ( Hook, 2010 ). However, further macrolevel factors may influence gender inequality, such as women's access to political power and representation, local cultures or gender ideologies. Future research may examine these macrolevel factors, as well as the effect of policies on gender inequality contexts and screening uptake.
At the individual-level, it should be highlighted that women who do not live with a partner have a significantly lower screening uptake than partnered women, regardless of gender inequality levels. These women may deserve more specific public health attention through policies and screening programmes to tackle a disadvantage which might stem from their lower social support or social isolation. Further individual-level covariates ( Table S4 , supplementary materials) pointed out that higher income women have higher up-to-date mammography uptake and lower never-screening, and those with upper-secondary education (compared to primary) also have a lower never-screening. This is in line with previous Swiss studies which showed that more socioeconomically disadvantaged women had lower cancer screening uptake ( Burton-Jeangros et al., 2017 ; Fedewa et al., 2015 ), and were more at risk of forgoing healthcare than men ( Guessous et al., 2012 ). Socioeconomic and demographic variables such as income, education and age intersect with gender processes and are important to understand the role of gender in screening uptake. Women with higher education level and income not only possess more individual resources to cope with daily work and family tasks, they also have more power of negotiation in their relationship and family and are more able to make (health) choices. However, women's relative power and status conferred by these resources may be “discounted” by arrangements characterised by male dominance at the macro-level, in economic, political and ideological areas ( Fuwa, 2004 ). Hence, this study focused on contextual gender inequality, since living in a gender unequal society may affect women's choices and health independently of their individual position. Future studies could examine how different women's individual-level (socioeconomic) resources interact with macrolevel factors, such as gender inequality or policies, and affect their healthcare uptake.
This study has several limitations. More specific areas of gender inequality, such as social or family policies, were not examined since these intertwine and may influence one another in shaping contextual gender inequality in the Swiss cantons ( Epple et al., 2014 ). Moreover, it is difficult to isolate canton-level social policies which often overlap with federal policies. Thus, the present study used two macrolevel gender inequality indicators to capture how the confluence of multiple factors define gender inequality contexts. Some limitations stem from the SHIS. Due to the cross-sectional nature of the survey, causality cannot be inferred. Mammography uptake was self-reported and might be prone to recall and social desirability biases. Nevertheless, even if some screening over-reporting had occurred, as it can be the case with self-reported screening, this is unlikely to have affected the present study's analyses which focus on associations between variables, rather than screening prevalence. The SHIS did not collect information on whether cohabiting partners were from the same sex, nor on their gender identity. Thus, this study could not distinguish between homosexual and heterosexual couples, nor examine the screening uptake of transgender respondents. Further research on homosexual and transgender women is recommended since they may face specific barriers to healthcare uptake and research on their mammography participation is lacking in Switzerland ( Bize et al., 2011 ).
This study has important strengths. It examines sub-national units, the Swiss cantons, which have low levels of between-cluster unexplained heterogeneity, as shown by the models' VPC, while these still are distinctive contexts shaped by their own social and institutional structures. Thus, associations between macrolevel gender inequality and mammography uptake could be unveiled in line with the hypothesis of gender stratification and preventive healthcare uptake. The SHIS provided information on women's cancer history and reason for screening (preventive versus diagnostic reason) hence analyses could be replicated excluding women who took part in screening for non-preventive reasons (in case of symptoms, treatment, or previous diagnosis), and women who had cancer, and results did not change. Finally, this study is the first to inspect the effect of the canton's context-level gender inequality on mammography screening uptake. Previous studies revealed that canton's institutions and social structures shaped contextual gender inequality ( Epple et al., 2014 ), and gender inequality in health was studied in Switzerland ( Burton-Jeangros, 2009 ). However, research has not addressed how canton-level social institutions and structures may shape preventive healthcare access. This is essential since the cantons autonomously manage their family and social policies, as well as healthcare system and prevention, and could act upon such determinants in order to enhance women's preventive health.

Section: 6. Policy implications

In addition to health policies, policies promoting gender equality may enhance women's uptake of preventive healthcare services . This study showed that contexts with more unequal sexual division of labour negatively affect women's mammography uptake. Thus, family and employment policies which promote gender equal labour market opportunities and work-family arrangements may also encourage their mammography uptake. These include policies such as publicly funded childcare, paternity leave, and labour policies promoting flexible work time and dual care, which reduce burden and time pressure on women and promote their (economic) empowerment ( Hook, 2010 ). International studies pointed out that upstream interventions which tackle gender inequalities in income, power, time use and household work may enhance women's health by acting upon social determinants of health ( Borrell et al., 2014 ; Palencia et al., 2014 ). Thus, this recommendation is of global relevance.
The results of this study may inform physicians and health policymakers and draw their attention on gender inequality and healthcare access. There is strong evidence that not only physicians' recommendation but also doctor-patient communication is fundamental to trigger women's screening uptake ( Peterson et al., 2016 ). Public health interventions should thus focus on physicians' role in counselling and encouraging screening uptake, and ensure that they are able to address screening barriers related to gender inequality. Where screening programmes are implemented, these should fully involve physicians in their promotion and implementation. Screening programme should also be sensitive to local gender cultures and inequalities. Research may help tailor screening promotion strategies addressing women's structural barriers to participation. Otherwise, sending out standard invitation letters may fail to trigger screening participation in gender inequality contexts.
The Swiss Federal Office of Public Health should further promote mammography programme implementation in all cantons, as well as national-level coordination. This is particularly relevant since the fragmented public health system caused by the high cantons’ autonomy was pointed out as a weakness in implementing preventive health policies and tackling health inequalities ( OECD/WHO, 2011 ). Fostering a nationwide approach to organised mammography screening, and drawing attention to structural barriers to screening, may help tackle screening inequalities, as opposed to regional programmes and opportunistic screening which may reproduce them.

Section: 7. Conclusion

This study contributes to the literature on the social determinants of healthcare access by confirming that macrolevel contextual gender inequality is associated with women's mammography uptake. It takes advantage of the sub-national variation between the Swiss cantons, highly autonomous administrative regions which independently manage their healthcare system, public health policies and mammography screening programme implementation, to examine mammography participation across contexts of varying levels of gender inequality.
Results showed that, in more gender unequal contexts, women had a higher probability of never-screening and a lower probability of being on-schedule with their mammography screening. This suggests that prevention-specific policies, such as mammography programmes, are embedded in broader macrolevel contexts of gender stratification. Policymakers should devote attention to such upstream determinants of screening participation if they aim at promoting equal access to screening. Otherwise, policies and screening programmes may suffer from inefficiencies and may not be able to reduce screening inequalities.
The effect of gender inequality on mammography uptake was examined in contexts of both organised and opportunistic screening, since not all cantons have implemented organised mammography programmes. In cantons which had implemented mammography programmes, gender inequality was no longer associated with mammography uptake, while it remained associated in opportunistic screening contexts. It is suggested that reliance on opportunistic screening may be related to the inequalities in mammography uptake observed in this study.
Finally, this study showed that the ‘health benefit’ of living with a partner is moderated by gender inequality contexts. From an institutional theory of health perspective, individual factors and determinants of healthcare access are affected by macrosocial structures and institutions which (re)allocated resources and (re)define individuals' ability to translate resources into health benefits. These should hence be apprehended in their specific contexts.
Future research may inquire how specific social and public health policies may modify the effect of gender stratification on preventive healthcare access. The motivation and attitudes which underpin women's mammography uptake, including the role of doctors, particularly in more gender unequal contexts, also need to be further examined in order to design adequate public health interventions.

Section: Author contribution

VJ: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Approved the final manuscript.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

This research was conducted within the project “PREVENT - Social inequalities in cancer prevention care and fundamental social causes: a comparative study of innovative technologies and (in)effective policies” which is funded by the Research Foundation – Flanders (grant number FWOOPR2018005701 ) and the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant number 176115 ). The funding bodies had no involvement in the study design, the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, the writing of the manuscript, nor in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. I gratefully acknowledge comments given on a previous version of this paper by PREVENT project's leaders and participants, Prof Claudine Burton-Jeangros, Dr Stéphane Cullati, Prof Piet Bracke and Vincent De Prez. I also sincerely thank Sibyl De Peic, David Torras Larson, Dr Stefan Sieber, Dr Michael Deml and Loïc Pignolo for their helpful comments and support, as well as two anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback. All mistakes are my own.
