Title: Relating to moral injuries: Dutch mental health practitioners on moral injury among military and police workers


Abstract: Abstract

In recent years the concept of moral injury has become a common term to describe the lasting impact of moral transgressions on frontline workers. This article aims to broaden the largely clinical debate by involving the views of a diverse group of mental health practitioners who support military and police personnel in the Netherlands. These practitioners are chaplains, confidential counsellors, social workers, psychologists and integrity officers. How do these practitioners describe the moral injuries of servicemen and police officers and how do they think these should be approached? Through interviews with thirty different practitioners this study shows that definitions of moral injuries diverge considerably. In addition, the article analyses six different approaches to moral injuries. These range from framing moral injury as an exceptional problem that requires specific expertise, to seeing it as a broad issue that places workers in a larger moral community. An analysis of this variety both serves as an indication of possible ways to deal with moral injuries, and as a basis for a critical reflection on the implications of various approaches.

Section: 1. Introduction

The term moral injury is increasingly used to describe the lasting impact of moral transgressions in various work settings. It is used mostly to describe the potential impact of military deployment, as especially soldiers are said to be easily exposed to events causing moral distress. They have to choose for instance, between the wellbeing of civilians and their mission objectives, or have to execute orders that run counter to their moral beliefs. The mental aftermath of these choices and predicaments might last long after missions ended ( Frame, 2015 ; Litz et al., 2009 ; Molendijk, 2021 ; Shay, 1994 ; Wood, 2016 ). Through the lens of moral injury this aftermath is understood in terms of prolonged and severe feelings of shame , guilt or betrayal, or – in the much-quoted words of Litz et al. (2009) – as “the lasting psychological, biological, spiritual, behavioural and social impact of perpetrating, failing to prevent, bearing witness to, or learning about acts that transgress deeply held moral beliefs and expectations” ( Litz et al., 2009 : 695).
There has been much academic debate on definitions, symptoms and treatment of moral injury and in a relative short time the concept shows considerable evolution. Initially the term has been studied mostly in relation to acts of perpetration, such as killing innocent civilians, and the unequivocal guilt or shame that might result from these events. With recent studies these initial perspectives have been enriched with other ideas. As such, support has grown for the idea that moral injury can also follow from events and situations in which people did not act or were unable to act ( Boudreau, 2011 : 754; Drescher et al., 2011 ; Farnsworth et al., 2017 : 391; Molendijk, 2021 ). Likewise, moral injury itself might be more than clear-cut guilt, shame or anger, but also involves moral confusion and disorientation ( Kinghorn, 2012 ; Molendijk, 2018 ; Sherman, 2014 ). In addition, moral injury is also understood to be relevant for workers in other occupational contexts, such as workers in health care ( Chary and Flood, 2021 ; Dean et al., 2019 ). A particular line of work that might increase the risk of moral injuries is that of the police, as police officers are equally subjected to morally distressing experiences of human suffering, violence and/or matters of life and death ( Papazoglou and Chopko, 2017 ; Smit et al., 2015 ; Tuttle et al., 2019 ).
As a relatively novel concept for a relatively under explored dimension of frontline work, moral injury is clearly ‘under construction’. In this study my goal is to enrich this debate by taking the question what might be a moral injury back into practice. I do this by analysing how a diverse group of Dutch mental health practitioners look upon the morally injurious aspects of military and police work.
Mapping these views is useful for various reasons. First of all, the views of a diverse group of practitioners reveal prevailing ideas about how the moral fallout of these jobs is currently looked upon and how this should be dealt with. Regardless of their expert level (or alleged lack thereof; Litz and Kerig, 2019 ), various practitioners in mental health – such as social workers, confidential counsellors and chaplains – interact with personnel in moral distress, and are likely to have vivid ideas about how this should be done. As such, moral injury is not only an objectivist truth ‘out there’, ready to be discovered and analysed in a detached positivist fashion. It is also a construct that depends on how practitioners define, locate and interpret the lasting impact of moral transgressions. Secondly, these views are worth consideration as suggestions in themselves for new approaches, and to develop more and broader attention for the moral burdens of working with the monopoly on legitimate violence. Thus, the point of departure here is that how these practitioners view and approach the lasting impact of moral transgressions is relevant, regardless of their knowledge of the theoretical concept of moral injury.

Section: 2. Discussing moral injury

Ever since its first inception by Jonathan Shay (1994) , moral injury has mainly been the subject of psychological studies. These delineate for instance, moral injury's symptoms and its incidence, describe ‘potentially morally injurious events’, postulate the possible clinical relation between transgressive acts and moral injury, and develop conceptual models ( Frankfurt and Frazier, 2016 ; Jinkerson, 2016 ; Litz et al., 2009 ; Litz and Kerig, 2019 ; Nash, 2019 ). Many of these studies also contrast moral injury to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), as the more familiar label for post-deployment trauma ( Drescher et al., 2011 ; Farnsworth et al., 2017 ; Frankfurt and Frazier, 2016 ). As opposed to PTSD's framing of moral trauma as ‘distorted cognitions’, theorists of moral injury claim that veterans have every reason to experience guilt, shame or anger ( Sherman, 2014 ). As a result, anger is seen as an appropriate response to situations in which soldiers have experienced betrayal, for instance by their organisation, their leaders, or by policymakers (Litz, 2016, in: Hodgson and Carey, 2017 : 1218). Likewise, shame and grief are suitable responses to acts that ran counter to their own beliefs (‘perpetration-based moral injury’, in words of Litz, 2016; in: Hodgson and Carey, 2017 : 1218). At the same time, many who use moral injury as a particular opposition to such psychopathological concepts still describe combat-related experiences in clinical, diagnostic terms ( Jinkerson, 2016 ; Litz et al., 2009 ; Litz and Kerig, 2019 ; Nash, 2019 ).
Therefore, others oppose this clinical perspective on moral injury. Some authors claim that by merely defining moral injury in terms of clinical symptoms, it becomes yet another (quasi-) diagnostic label and tool that primarily looks at individual properties to locate and define trauma; a pitfall of psycho-pathological reductionism. These authors state that current approaches to moral injury hinge on the ‘injurious’ part of the term, and that it overlooks its moral dimensions. Thus, they claim, moral injury cannot be understood without taking a person's relations with others into account ( Molendijk, 2021 ; Wiinikka-Lydon, 2017 ). Especially the theological and pastoral contributions to the debate view moral injury as more than an individual, psychological attribute and emphasize “the religious, spiritual, existential and ethical issues associated with moral injury” ( Carey and Hodgson, 2018 : 5). Some of these accounts particularly claim that psychological approaches are limiting and reduce the moral complexities of human agency ( Kinghorn, 2012 ). Suggested alternative approaches and therapies to moral injury include, among others, ‘spiritual screening’ ( Carey and Hodgson, 2018 : 3), pastoral counselling, “pastoral narrative disclosure therapy” ( Carey and Hodgson, 2018 : 5) and various forms of rituals that shift the focus from individual psychological treatment to more diverse and collective healing practices that also involve veterans' relations with others outside the military (cf. Antal et al., 2019 ; Ramsay, 2019 ).
In this paper I want to add a novel perspective to these debates, by moving back to the practice of those who support and help military and police frontline workers. Although these practitioners might not always apply the term moral injury itself, many of them deal with the lasting impact of moral transgressions experienced by frontline workers in uniformed occupations.
The analysis presented here will add to the observation made by others that the existence of a label like moral injury is telling of how the users of state-ordered violence are portrayed. In words of MacLeish (2018 : 139): “medical and psychological labels […] defin [e] normal and excessive forms of violence and healthy and pathological reactions to it”. I will pick up this point, and discuss it is not only the label itself that is worth scrutiny, but also ideas about the label in practice. Various views on moral injury might be read as a variety in implicit ideas about the moral consequences of this work and how these should be dealt with. As such, the various interpretations of moral injury might be indicative of various (possible) ways in which the morality of military and police work is discussed or how it should be discussed (cf. Lutz and Millar, 2012 ). Thus, involving these views enriches the current debate on moral injury and shows how morally injurious aspects of military and police work are actually defined and approached in practice. Therefore, professional adaptations and views are seen as informative in themselves: their relative autonomy from organisational ( and theoretical) authorities are here taken as a given, and considered worth scrutiny in itself. This is not unlike what Lipsky says about street level bureaucrats as policy makers ( Lipsky, 2010 ; cf. Laws and Hajer, 2006 ). As interpreters, appliers and adapters of policy these practitioners shape policy in practice, and the interaction between workers and the organisation for an important part depends on their discretionary autonomy. As such, this paper does not so much map various conceptual usages of the term moral injury ( Wiinikka-Lydon, 2019 ), as it explores bottom-up how various practitioners locate and qualify moral injury in their practices. I do so by discussing their responses to two main questions: what is a moral injury, and how should it be approached?
In what follows, I first describe the methodology of this study. In the next section I present the results, whereas the last section discusses these results and draws conclusions.

Section: 3. Methodology

This study is of a qualitative and explorative nature, built upon a grounded theoretical approach ( Glaser and Strauss, 2012 ). Instead of tying respondents to predefined theoretical definitions of moral injury, they were invited to reflect more freely on what they see as moral injuries and how they think these should be approached. During interviews a generic definition of moral injury was used to steer interviews away from other moral aspects (that were not particularly morally injurious , such as temporary moral dilemmas) or mental health issues that are not necessarily moral in nature (such as other forms of stress or trauma). Therefore, two core aspects of Litz et al.‘s definition ( 2009 ) of moral injury were used by way of demarcation, being that moral injury should in any case be about 1. a lasting impact, of 2. the confrontation with moral transgression(s).
In this study a diverse range of mental health practitioners were interviewed on their views on moral injuries. The reason for involving various practitioners lies in the consideration that moral injury is manifest in various forms, and on various places. As such, only a portion of workers who experience moral injuries eventually end up in specialist clinical care. Many might refrain from seeking help ( Molendijk, 2021 ), or are more likely to refer to ‘gatekeeper professionals’, such as general practitioners, or religious/spiritual advisors, such as chaplains ( Nazarov et al., 2020 ). This is not only related to stigma on mental health issues, but also to moral injury being a relatively novel and elusive concept without having much of a status as medical diagnosis ( Molendijk, 2021 ; Morgan et al., 2016 ). Therefore, involving more practitioners who interact with frontline workers about these matters – also before they seek actual help – yields more views on moral injuries.
The practitioners who were interviewed here are professionals for care, support and treatment of Dutch military and police workers. Models developed by Gersons, Gorissen, De Vries, IJzerman & Wiersma (2006) and Gersons and Burgers (2012) position practitioners in concentric circles, depending on their relative proximity to frontline workers: from embedded care and assistance (chaplains), to primary care and assistance (social workers), to secondary and tertiary mental health care (psychologists, psychotherapists). These models provided the first three groups of practitioners for this study: chaplains, social workers and psychologists. Following a consultation with other researchers and members of a monitoring board, two additional types of practitioners were interviewed: confidential counsellors and integrity officers. These five groups of practitioners provide different forms of support for frontline workers, but are all confronted with workers’ moral issues and the impact of moral transgressions (see further below).
Involving these respondents in a qualitative research design was done to exploratively collect a wide range of views on and approaches to moral injuries, and to study how practitioners define and give meaning to this idea ( Silverman, 2011 ). In total thirty respondents were selected based on an expected fruitful exchange about the morally injurious dimensions of police and military work. Selection was done through reputation sampling ( Bernard, 2006 ). Thus, initial contacts were established using the suggestions and leads of personal contacts on the Netherlands Defence Academy, of members of a monitoring board, and exploratory consultations with several researchers. This exploration led to an initial series of interviews with mental health practitioners. After these initial interviews, I used the additional suggestions of these practitioners, and contacts within the police and military organisations as well as the Netherlands Veterans Institute to contact others and supplement data.
The first group of practitioners are chaplains ( geestelijk verzorgers ) who provide a form of embedded care (in Dutch: nuldelijns hulp ). Traditionally this form of support had a religious background, and concerned support of soldiers struggling with various moral and existential issues. Currently, chaplains are still officially employed by ecclesiastical and ideological institutes outside the military, thus ensuring their independence. Within the Dutch police organisation, this profession has only been institutionalized in 2020.
A second type of support involved in this study is provided by confidential counsellors ( vertrouwenspersonen ). These counsellors also provide an embedded form of care and assistance: they work as counsellors in addition to their regular tasks, and are mostly direct colleagues of those who seek help or support. Workers can seek their support for work related worries, for example regarding labour disputes or inappropriate behaviour, but also for forms of moral distress.
Social workers ( maatschappelijk werkers) are a third group of practitioners interviewed here and are seen as part of primary health care and assistance. They are the first point of reference for a wide range of issues that might hamper work and work performance of personnel, including issues such as addictions, debts, mental health issues, domestic issues, etcetera. In addition, the Netherlands Veterans Institute ( Veteraneninstituut ), employs a group of social workers who are available for military veterans (both active and post-active) and police officers.
A fourth group of practitioners are psychologists and therapists. Within the military, therapists are employed by the department for military mental health care (MGGZ Militaire Geestelijke gezondheidszorg ). As so-called secondary care and assistance these practitioners are responsible for diagnosis and treatment of servicemen after referral by others (such as social workers). The Dutch police organisation has also appointed its own psychologists for diagnosis, education and prevention of mental health issues, but they do not treat police personnel themselves – as opposed to their military counterparts at MGGZ. For this, police officers have to be referred to tertiary care and assistance. This encompasses more specialized forms of support and treatment by various providers.
The fifth and last group of practitioners included in this study are integrity officers. Although these professionals are not a part of the system for care and assistance described above, they do deal with moral issues on a daily basis, both when a suspicion of integrity violation arises, but also to prepare workers for integrity issues and moral dilemmas through training and education.
The following table summarizes the professional backgrounds of the respondents (see Table 1 ). Table 1 . Respondents. Empty Cell Chaplains Confidential counsellors Social workers Psychologists Integrity officers Total Military 3 0 3 3 3 12 Police 2 4 3 0 2 11 Both 1 1 2 3 0 7 Total 6 5 8 6 5 30
‘Military’, ‘police’ or ‘both’ indicate the client-groups practitioners work with or have worked with throughout their careers. In addition, two respondents do not fall strictly within this categorization, but are classified as confidential counsellor and social worker respectively, due to the nature of their work.
For data collection I used semi-structured interview with a topic list, therewith allowing me to discuss several topics, while providing enough space for a more elaborate reflection on specific parts ( Bernard, 2006 : 205). Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, most interviews were conducted through video conferencing, although a few took place at the work place of the respondents. Three interviews were with two respondents at the same time. The interviews were held between July and January 2020, lasted one to two hours, and were all recorded. An informed consent procedure was followed: all respondents were provided details on the research through a letter stating aims and procedure of the research. Respondents were assured full anonymization, the right of revocation, and were provided with a form to formally grant consent.
Interviews were transcribed and analysed using qualitative data-analysis software (Atlas.ti). Coding itself was of an inductive and open nature, in which codes were generated from within the text ( Glaser and Strauss, 2012 ), and were initially only centred around main categories, such as ‘explanation of own practice’, ‘definitions of moral injury’, ‘ideas about appearance’, and ‘ideas about suitable approaches’. After the open coding phase, material was further analysed through axial coding, in which I analysed different categories and (potential) subcategories, leading to a first general sketch of the various categories presented below ( Boeije, 2010 ).

Section: 4. Views on moral injury

Although not all practitioners are familiar with academic definitions of the concept of moral injury, they easily relate to the lasting impact of moral transgressions through the examples they see in their practices. In defining moral injuries some practitioners clearly involve more than current clinical definitions of moral injuries, while others meet this stretching with scepticism and disapproval. Here I first describe the views on what might be moral injury itself, in the next section I explain various approaches and delve deeper into the oppositions between practitioners.
When defining moral injuries, military practitioners often mention examples of lingering post-deployment distress that are related to engagement in violence used during past missions, for example in Afghanistan in 2007 and 2008. In addition, practitioners also tend to see moral injury as a form of guilt resulting from an inability to act. Here, a typical example is the Dutchbat III mission in 1995 in Bosnia. In this mission soldiers were often confronted with people in dire need who they felt they could not help. Practitioners observe that the ensuing powerlessness might haunt veterans for years. A military chaplain explains how a Dutchbat III soldier was told not to help a heavily bleeding woman who was delivering a baby, as she was expected to arrange her own healthcare: So he had to send the woman away. Later he went back to investigate, how did things turn out for her. This issue had been eating away at him for twenty years.
Among police practitioners the concept of moral injury is less-known, but still resounds clearly with what they see in their own practices. They recognize the prolonged feelings of guilt and shame, but often relate moral injury to other events than acts of violence. A police integrity officer mentions what kind of acts could be seen as leading up to moral injury: It's more than just violence. It's also the deprivation of liberty, or accusing or suspecting someone of something severe, without having evidence, and the question you have to bear, “Did I do a lot of injustice to this person?” I think many policemen struggle with these questions. “Did I act right? Could I have saved someone's life if I would have driven a bit harder, or if I would have responded quicker?”
Other practitioners likewise stretch the causes for moral injury by involving more than singular events. They generally associate signs of moral injury with a series of events, or the more general circumstances of their work. Police practitioners point out that in police work a series of events, actions, or even less conspicuous moments might eventually lead to a moral injury. They often speak of a ‘stacking’ of events and circumstances that eventually leads to a moral injury. These respondents see moral injury as something that develops slumbering, characterizing it as a ‘war of attrition’, in which police officers are constantly confronted with morally transgressive situations that eat away at them.
Another regular association with moral injury concerns the forms of betrayal experienced by workers. Again practitioners often mention the example of the 1995 Dutchbat III mission in Bosnia, and especially its aftermath. Military practitioners highlight that the lack of support or harsh political and societal judgments upon their return home might have caused servicemen's moral injuries. Here, moral injury seems to be about both the moral challenges in the field, and the way others judge those who have faced these challenges (cf. Molendijk, 2018 ).
However, these interpretations involve more than most current ideas of betrayal-based moral injury. Whereas most definitions connect betrayal-based moral injury with specific high-stakes situations ( Shay, 1994 ), or place betrayal-based moral injury in the context of warzone events ( Dresscher et al., 2011 ), quite a few practitioners in this study claim betrayal-based moral injury can also occur in apparently more mundane situations, that might resemble what some call institutional betrayal (cf. Smith and Freyd, 2014 ). Several police practitioners refer to internal integrity investigations as morally damaging. These investigations are carried out by the internal Bureau of investigations VIK ( Veiligheid, Integriteit en Klachten ; Safety, Integrity and Complaints). These investigations and the lack of support during these investigations are said to have an impact that is so severe that is it is safe to speak of them as morally injuring (see also Meershoek et al., 2020 ).
In these cases police officers are said to become morally injured because their faith in the organisation is destroyed. This is particularly painful, practitioners claim, because police officers are said to do their job with a strong personal belief that they do the right thing. Some explain that police officers might experience their work as a calling and that they would be willing to sell their soul for their work.
These interpretations of what events might lead to moral injury also has consequences for how moral injury appears.
Although some practitioners stick to guilt and shame as distinctive features of moral injury, many also see it as more than that. As a result of the slumbering moral ‘war of attrition’ described above police officers might more slowly and implicitly develop something of a moral injury. These frontline workers are said to gradually have trouble identifying themselves with their line of work and the decisions they have to make. This latter point shows that practitioners might also understand moral injury as an identity issue, and as a rift between a workers' self and the job they carry out; even as an existential crisis. After specific morally transgressive events, or as a result of multiple events some police officers appear to ask themselves: is this the kind of job I want to do? Or: am I this kind of person?
Here, especially police practitioners define moral injury as a matter of personal convictions and how these might become to be at odds with their work. Obviously, not all of these personal doubts qualify as moral injuries, but practitioners point out that workers are sometimes inclined to continue their job while it goes against their moral intuitions, eventually leading to something that resembles a moral injury. Practitioners qualify this in various terms, for example as ‘being at odds with oneself’, of ‘acting front stage and being backstage’, of ‘being disloyal to yourself’, as ‘a masquerade’, of ‘only living in your occupation and your organisation’, or as ‘a loss of sight on one's moral compass'.
In sum, the ideas of the various practitioners about moral injury show many parallels with definitions in literature, but also tend to stretch initial definitions. Those familiar with the notion – often supporting military veterans – mainly associate it with past (in)famous Dutch military missions and exemplary and singular events of perpetration or negligence. Police practitioners claim morally injurious events might comprise a wider range, going beyond these typical examples. In addition, existing literature conceptualizes moral injury as potentially betrayal-based, but some practitioners claim moral injury might and should also be understood as the result of betrayal outside typical ‘high stakes situations’, i.e. the way they are treated by their organisation in other situations. As a result, some see moral injury as a slumbering ‘war of attrition’, and claim it can also be understood in terms of an existential crisis, in addition to unequivocal guilt and shame.
It follows that practitioners clearly do not agree on definitions of moral injuries. Whereas some reserve the term for the typical cases known from literature – guilt and shame after incidents involving violence or negligence – others tend to involve many more types of incidents as potentially morally injurious. These disagreements become most evident in more specific ideas about approaches to moral injuries: how should this aspect of military and police work be dealt with?
This next section analyses six different suggested approaches to moral injuries. Important to note here is that these views are not limited to individual respondents, as one practitioner might favour various approaches. 1. An exceptional problem: guarding the concept
A first approach to moral injuries can for an important part be seen as a response to the stretching of the term described above.
Some practitioners state that moral injury is a specific and confined label that is increasingly and wrongly used for various situations. As such, this approach could be seen as a response to the tendency to stretch the term by calling this an inflation or ‘watering down’ of the term. Moral injury might become a ‘catch-all phrase’ for all kinds of situations, or reasons why someone is not progressing in treatment. A clinician working with both military and police clients states: A treatment might come to a halt, and then [people say] “oh, he is really morally injured”. And within the Veterans Institute the concept is also coined. And now you hear it a lot, and then it's “yeah, but I have moral injury”. And then you ask, “but what is it exactly?” […] So we don't have a clear definition, like with PTSD in the DSM , that gives you a clear frame.
This ‘watering down’ of the term bears with it several risks, they point out, one of these being that those who are genuinely morally injured are overlooked. Thus, moral injury becomes ‘something everybody has,’ in words of another clinician. Others point to the risk of moral injury becoming a buzzword among veterans, active military and police officers alike, and that there is an ‘insatiable appetite’ for recognition, possibly leading to further incorrect applications of the term. A confidential counsellor jokingly states that with all the attention for moral injury, the same risk exists as with the attention for PTSD , leading to police officers in the canteen asking each other, ‘John, are you diagnosed with PTSD yet? No? Me neither! What could be wrong with us?’
Some practitioners propose a guarding of the term, by distinguishing it from moral distress, by refining its clinical description and diagnosis, or by defining an ‘A criterion’ for moral injury. An event needs to meet criteria of minimum severity to lead to an actual moral injury, some state, and cannot include feelings of betrayal outside high stakes situations, such as the integrity investigations mentioned above. 2. A problem of sensemaking by frontline workers: redefining therapy
A second approach proposes an adaptation of clinical practice. Some practitioners criticize narrow clinical approaches of moral injury. A military psychologist states the clinical perspective has been exclusively on PTSD, through which moral injury has been both overlooked and framed too much in terms of its familiarity to PTSD. In his view some practices rely too much on labelling through DSM diagnoses and that ‘all this classifying basically led to a narrowing of the clinical perspective.’ A description in terms of symptoms and appearance might well miss moral injury's essence and the dimensionality of the concept.
Instead of symptom reduction through alleged ‘quick fixes’ such as EMDR therapy, a clinician claims that treating moral injury should focus on sensemaking in a ‘secure relation’ between a veteran and a professional. This might be done, he states, by recreating an image of the circumstances, for instance by involving others who were involved in an incident, or using maps of the mission area. This serves a reshaping of the relevance incidents have for veterans, in order to address deep rooted feelings of guilt and shame.
This emphasis on connection, on familiarity and on sensemaking is underscored by many respondents – both within and outside clinical practice. Veterans are said to highly value contact with professionals who ‘speak the same language’, or with other workers – ‘partners in misfortune’ – to share their experiences. In this sense, many practitioners stress that approaching moral injury should always happen in close connection with workers' experiences, and not through a predefined top-down therapy. A military social worker for instance, suggests that her organisation is good at ‘making leaflets’, or translating complicated issues into ‘boxes that can be ticked’, and warns for translating moral injury into yet another protocol. Obviously, they claim, this issue deserves a more fundamental and bottom-up approach. 3. A problem of control: improving mechanisms of coping
A third approach sees moral injury mainly as a problem of individual control: workers who are morally injured are basically overwhelmed and unable to relate to events they have witnessed. This approach highlights that dealing with moral injury should essentially be about giving workers back control on their relation to morally injurious events.
In this view, moral injury is a problem to be solved, and people who are morally injured should look upon their issues in such manner. This implies that practitioners who favour this approach – mostly social workers – might also be highly critical about approaches that are less focussed on this stance. A police social worker explains: Of course it's good if people can vent their spleen, and can say how wrong things are […]. But for the functioning of the company, the goings on, you eventually need people who are capable to move on […] and know how to solve problems and make sure they get a grip on stuff in life itself.
Practitioners who embrace this approach often aim for rehabilitation and return to work of workers on sick leave. They claim that the most sustainable forms of support for workers with mental health issues, including those that are morally injured, is about ‘getting grip’ on events. Some practitioners use metaphors of physical health, such as ‘moral fitness’ as a way to increase individual control and prevent moral injury: ‘By enlarging moral fitness, you render people more resilient for moral damage,’ a military integrity officer explains. Moral fitness here also means you are prepared for potentially morally injurious events, and know how to approach these positively, without being touched too much.
In sum, these first three ideas about approaches to moral injuries all seem to view moral injury as an exceptional and individual problem that requires specific expertise to solve. The next three ideas adopt a wholly different stance, and highlight the moral and collective aspects of moral injuries. 4. Part of the human condition: incorporating shame and guilt
A fourth suggested approach to moral injury claims that it should be kept out of clinical practice altogether. As such, some practitioners – often chaplains – put up fierce resistance against what one of them calls the ‘clinical appropriation of moral injury’ and associated labelling practices. They perceive psychology and psychiatry as ‘highly dominant disciplines’ that obliterate what is valuable, but hard to fit into protocols. As such, they denounce the alleged tendencies of psychologists and psychiatrists to either ignore a phenomenon when it does not fit in a ‘protocol or a DSM classification’, or to fit it into a protocol anyway. In words of a police chaplain, labels and diagnoses wrongly allow us to ‘relocate guilt’ claiming that … for an organisation [it] is the most familiar and easy way. If we invent a label, good, we can apply it to individual people, but they ignore what systemic features might lay below.
Some practitioners claim this labelling is a blatant misrecognition of workers' experiences, and even that this confinement is in itself morally traumatising. Many therapies and approaches thus reduce moral injury to an individual characteristic, whereas it is an issue that concerns more than an individual's disposition, and something that deserves more than a solution to ‘the problem’ of absenteeism.
Conversely, many chaplains highlight the moral aspects of moral injury and claim that it should not be ‘solved’ or cured. Instead, feelings of guilt and shame make us human and show our humanity in the face of inhuman situations. Therefore ‘moral injury is not curable, you have to integrate it,’ in words of a military chaplain, and be ‘made bearable’, in words of a police chaplain. Approaching moral injury should be about reorientation, about renewed contemplation. Moreover, they suggest that redefined sensemaking is not to be reached through individual therapy alone, but through such things as return trips to former mission areas in which veterans go back to the places and people that figure in their moral injuries, to clean their consciousness, look for reconciliation and (self) forgiveness. 5. A problem of education: finding your moral compass
Continuing the emphasis on the moral dimensions of moral injury a fifth approach primarily suggests prevention and moral education : a suitable approach to moral injury starts before the actual work.
Some practitioners claim the institutional attention for moral challenges is very poor, in comparison to other elements of education. ‘Mission preparation might take half a year, but it contains perhaps only four hours of ethics training, that sounds minimal to me,’ in words of a military integrity officer. Moreover, it is hard to adapt such forms of moral preparation to young and unexperienced students who are said to have chosen the military out of an eagerness for physical challenges. A military chaplain highlights it is their personal motivation and conviction that provides most possibilities for preventing moral injury. Because, she explains, Idealists burn out first, you're not gonna make it here, because it's a fucked up company, I'm sorry. You're not gonna change the world. So change yourself, what is it you could learn, how do you go in as a human being , and how do you go out?
It is this wish for an orientation on motivation and more implicit moral convictions that is also clearly voiced by some police practitioners. As such, this approach appears to be more about education than preparation. Some state there is a lack of attention for ‘the person in the uniform’ and that dealing with moral injury should start with prevention through a (re)orientation on the ‘moral compass’ of police officers. Instead of the emphasis on individual control and the stoic knowing how to deal with particular events, this approach implies a fundamental reorientation. A confidential counsellor states, If something goes wrong we're at a loose end to open up all kinds of windows. But […] you also have to reach out in peace time. […] where is your own identity, and your own moral compass in this organisation?
The apparent attention for moral issues, in words of another respondent, is quite ‘frontstage’, whereas a more substantial approach to morally challenging aspects of work is still lacking. 6. A circumstantial problem: addressing the circumstances
Continuing with the latter point, a sixth and last approach to moral injury points to another fundamental issue. Several respondents point to the more systemic features of moral injuries: preventing moral injury starts with acknowledging the role of the circumstances of military and police work.
This concerns many different elements, ranging from situational circumstances and adversities, societal perceptions of the military and the police, to societal changes in which a ‘post-religious loss of meaning’, in words of a police chaplain is seen as contributing to the vulnerability to moral injury. Also, elements of occupational culture play a role in the view of many practitioners. Addressing moral injury starts with ‘creating a common language to address these issues in the first place,’ in words of a police confidential counsellor. Here both police and military practitioners highlight preventing moral injury also starts with a change in occupational culture, of making dilemmas debatable.
Likewise, leadership is an element that is mentioned often as contributing both to the occurrence – through a lack of attention for the morally burdensome aspects of the work – and to the prevention of moral injury. Especially the latter provides many possibilities for prevention of moral injury. Thus, ‘having a leader who listens’ in the words of a police confidential counsellor, is considered essential and in need of improvement according to many. Within the police for instance, senior police officers (called operational experts ) are not trained for this at all.
These six different approaches show a lot of disagreement and contestation among practitioners. This is obviously related to differences in the (disciplinary) background of the practitioners involved here, but they appear to be further exacerbated by a lack of cooperation and coordination between practitioners. In words of a military social worker, ‘we have so many auxiliary troops […] but they are not joining forces’. Police practitioners also observe there are many different ‘counters’ for police officers to refer to that tend to bureaucratic compartmentalization or even contestation. In this respect, the professional support for frontline workers seems partly characterized by territorial disputes among practitioners.
In addition, moral injury appears to be an elusive and sensitive issue. Workers are said to be unable or reluctant to express their moral burdens. They often express themselves in general terms of ‘tensions’ or ‘constant worrying’, without knowing how to specify what they are worrying about, a psychologist explains. A military social worker addresses the taboo on these matters and claims ‘it's kind of the losers' disorder of all disorders. That's what also makes it hard to talk about’. As such, some practitioners state that their own reflections on moral injury are a far cry from how workers themselves express their experiences. Moreover, it is unclear when frustrations and moral dilemmas deserve the predicate injury . ‘If you think of it for 20 years, day and night, or if you stop functioning in society,’ a military chaplain wonders. In this latter respect, practitioners also contrast moral injury with PTSD, as an institutionalized, beneficial and public form or trauma, even though this obviously underestimates the complexities veterans face in their negotiations over that label ( Elliott et al., 2018 ). Moral injury does not have an official diagnosis that comes with benefits, such as a veterans' disability compensation (in Dutch: militair invaliditeitspensioen or MIP ). ‘Moral injury is nothing,’ in words of a military social worker, ‘It doesn't provide you with a MIP, nor with a decoration. It's not tough, and you don't get a shiny medal [ glimmertje ]’.
These differences might lead to moral injury to become something of a ‘plaything’ in words of a military chaplain, since there is no institutionalized approach to it yet. In the last section I share some reflections on this risk.

Section: 5. Conclusion and discussion

This article has dealt with various interpretations of moral injury by mental health practitioners who support military and police frontline workers. In this conclusive section I reflect on these findings by discussing the possible relations between approaches and practitioners’ backgrounds, by arguing what this reveals about the relation to the moral nature of military and police work, and by shortly discussing the indeterminacy surrounding moral injury.
The various approaches discussed here can be summarized in the following overview (see Table 2 ). Table 2 . Six approaches to moral injury. Exceptional problem Approach Critique on… Clinical Guard concept and strive for clinical utility Inflation of label Sense making Therapy through bottom up, shared sense making Top-down therapy (‘quick fixes’), protocols Individual control Strengthening individual control and moral fitness Talking therapies, venting without goal of rehabilitation Broad issue Approach Critique on… Part of human condition ‘Integrate’ moral injuries Individual therapy, diagnosing, ‘problem solving’ approaches Education Orientation on moral compass, attention for ‘person in the uniform’. Reactive approaches Circumstances Addressing occupational culture and leadership Instrumental and individual approaches
First of all, this exploration shows many differences and disagreements between practitioners, part of which can be linked to differences in professional background (even though it would demand another approach to really establish these connections).
The clinical approach to moral injury can obviously be found mostly among psychologists. This concurs with existing clinical endeavours for a more confined description of moral injury ( Litz and Kerig, 2019 ; Nash, 2019 ). Likewise, the second approach is also primarily a psychological view on moral injury, but differs from the first approach in that it appears to reflect a difference in psychological tradition. The third approach might in part be connected to social workers, particularly those within police and military organisations. They tend to approach moral injury instrumentally: preventing moral injury through individual resilience and control keeps workers employable. This, in turn, seems to be in line with views from ‘positive psychology’ about the importance of an individual's ability (and responsibility) to recuperate after impactful events (cf. Van Baarle and Molendijk, 2021 ). The fourth approach is found mostly among chaplains; its focus on the moral part of moral injury fits well with their role as moral counsellors (bringing to mind theological ideas about the concept; cf. Kinghorn, 2012 ). Practitioners who voice the fifth approach share this stress on workers' moral views, but highlight how these views come into being. These practitioners might again be chaplains, but also some integrity officers appear to share this view, with an interest in what lies below moral dilemmas or integrity issues and how these can be addressed through education and reflection. Lastly, framing moral injury in the context of organisational circumstances is done by some confidential counsellors, but also those social workers who relate workers' issues to their occupational context. The latter approaches also bring to mind solutions that propose a mitigation of ‘moral risks’ through recruiting, training or supervision ( Blumberg et al., 2020 ).
In addition, these interpretations also uncover differences in how the moral nature of military and police work is seen in general. As such, moral injury presupposes ‘a set of moral claims about the special nature of war-related suffering’ ( MacLeish, 2018 : 133), but this paper shows that these claims also diverge depending on the interpretation of moral injury itself . In other words, these interpretations of moral injury might imply different consequences for how to relate to the morally most difficult sides of police and military work. The approaches described above appear to roughly represent two different relations to these aspects of police and military work.
The first three approaches frame moral injury as an exceptional and individual problem that can and should be dealt with through unique expertise. These approaches appear to draw a hard line between those who soldier on and the ‘morally wounded’. Moreover, they appear to limit interaction with the latter to experts (the first approach), experts and co-workers (the second approach), or to coaches and rehabilitation experts (the third approach). Moral injury here is an exclusive symptom, and interaction about this aspect of military and police work needs specific expertise only. Part of these ideas can be understood as a response to an inflation of the term: if too many events qualify as morally injurious, or if moral injury applies to all kinds of experiences, what then, is left of the distinguishing properties of moral injury as such? (cf. Withuis, 2002 , on the perceived risk of a ‘trauma culture’).
Conversely, the fierce resistance of other practitioners against such exclusionary takes can be understood out of fear that moral issues among workers only deserve attention when these qualify as (narrow) moral injuries . These concerns seem to be in line with the very reason why early theorists of moral injury targeted PTSD's limitations in the first place in which post-traumatic suffering is reduced to ‘an internally contained mental disorder’ ( Molendijk, 2021 ; cf. Lutz and Millar, 2012 : 493). Therefore, the last three approaches imply moral injury communicates a wholly different message, placing police officers and military personnel in a larger moral community. If moral injury makes workers human, it also opens up the possibility to address the ethical issues that might come with it. Maybe even: what does it mean and what should it ultimately mean to fulfil this exclusive role in society? (cf. Bittner, 1970 ).
Lastly, the ideas presented here show moral injury remains an indeterminate and elusive notion, falling between multiple disciplines. Alluding to what MacLeish calls moral injury's ‘fringe status’, at the border of ‘conventional clinical categories’ ( 2018 : 129), this makes moral injury particularly hard to pin down. It raises the question to what extent such indeterminacy is acceptable.
On the one hand, disputes among professionals over moral injury distract from the concept's potential to address the morally injurious aspects of police or military work. As such, indeterminacy does not only lead to uncertainty over what moral injury is – as expressed by various practitioners – but also appears to feed specific agendas and territorial strife between practitioners. Some practitioners seem less concerned with moral injury itself, but more with bureaucratic divisions between professions . On the other hand, disagreement on moral injury might not be something that needs to be resolved. In essence, uncertainty might take a “constitutive form” ( Berthomé et al., 2012 ). Ideally, in this indeterminacy a more productive approach to the morally injurious aspects of working in police and military professions might be found. As such, the views discussed here present multiple possible approaches or indications for how suitable approaches can be embedded in existing practices.
In this latter respect, moral injury could be the common ground where different practitioners meet, but this would also require participants – various practitioners – to produce this common ground, and not only to presuppose it ( Hanks, 2006 ). That is, a setting and space is needed with “a common language, with a common repertoire of indexical construals , epistemic particles, basic lexicon and grammar” ( ibid. : 324). A resource for such a common ground might be derived from the basic idea that moral injury is socially shaped ( Molendijk, 2018 ). While acknowledging a standard of minimum severity is needed to speak of a moral injury, many approaches show moral injury is a social and contextual phenomenon at heart. They show that moral injury cannot be fully medicalized, and that interventions are needed that look at the context in which workers operate; be it by involving their (former) co-workers, their upbringing and moral beliefs, their occupational training, or the organisational circumstances. In addition, and in response to the elusiveness of moral injuries, a balanced approach would also win from making practitioners aware of their implicit ideas about the moral consequences of police and military work, through what Wiinikka-Lydon calls ‘constructive comparison’ ( 2019 ). In effect, any new intervention could and should start with more professional consciousness of their own take on this crucial but underexposed aspect of military and police work.

Section: Credit author statement

Teun Eikenaar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing, Visualization.

Section: Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the following persons for their helpful feedback on earlier versions of this article: Eric-Hans Kramer, Tine Molendijk, Desiree Verweij, Naomi Gilhuis, and Sofie van der Maarel. I would also like to express my gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their useful suggestions.
