Title: Mediation of the parental education gradient in early adult mortality by childhood adversity: a population-based cohort study of more than 1 million children


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Children born into disadvantaged socioeconomic circumstances are more likely to experience both adversity during childhood and premature mortality. The aim of this study was to investigate how much of the parental education gradient in early adult mortality is explained by exposure to childhood adversity.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We used data from the nationwide register-based Danish Life Course cohort study. Our sample consisted of all individuals born between Jan 1, 1980, and Dec 31, 2001, who did not emigrate or die before age 16 years, and for whom information on parental education level was available. These individuals were followed up for mortality from age 16 years until Dec 31, 2018. Highest attained parental education level at birth was divided into low (≤9 years), medium (10–12 years), and high (>12 years) according to years in education. Individuals were assigned to one of five childhood adversity trajectory groups based on their annual exposure between age 0 and 16 years to a broad selection of adversities in three dimensions: material deprivation, loss or threat of loss in the family, and family dynamics. Childhood abuse was not included. The association between parental education level and mortality was assessed with a Cox proportional hazards model. To assess the magnitude of mediation of this association by childhood adversity, we used counterfactual mediation analysis and an Aalen additive hazards model. Analyses were unadjusted and adjusted for parental origin and parental ages at birth.

Abstract_Section: Findings

Our sample consisted of 1 278 156 individuals followed up from birth until age 16–38 years. The sample comprised 655 633 (51·3%) men and 622 523 (48·7%) women, and 1 243 981 (97·3%) participants were of European descent. During follow-up, 5387 deaths were registered. Compared with the high parental education group, we calculated a total effect equal to 8·7 additional deaths (95% CI 6·6–10·9) per 100 000 person-years in the medium parental education group and 31·9 (28·5 to 35·2) per 100 000 person-years in the low parental education group. Mediation through childhood adversity trajectories accounted for 41·5% (95% CI 8·0–67·5) of the additional deaths in the medium parental education group and 46·4% (32·9–58·8) of the additional deaths in the low parental education group. The results were similar when adjusting the analyses for sociodemographic factors.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

The experience of childhood adversity seems to be an important mediator of the association between parental education and mortality in early adulthood. Interventions reducing the exposure to childhood adversity might thus reduce the parental education gradient in early adult mortality.

Abstract_Section: Funding

Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development.

Section: Introduction

Socioeconomic circumstances during childhood have persistent effects on health and wellbeing in adulthood, including on mortality. By early adulthood, an inverse relationship between parental education level and mortality risk is already established. Generally, these associations are stronger among men than among women.
To develop effective preventive strategies to reduce health inequality, it is important to understand and disentangle the underlying pathways linking parental education level to premature mortality in early adult life. Increased exposure to childhood adversity, such as poverty, parental separation, and parental somatic and psychiatric illness, might be an important underlying pathway. Experience of childhood adversities has an established link with parental education. For example, in the nationwide Danish Life Course (DANLIFE) cohort, registry data on 2 155 654 children born in 1980–2015 showed that 20·2% of children born to a mother with low education (≤9 years of education received) experienced three or more adversities during childhood, whereas this proportion was only 3·5% for children born to mothers with high education (>12 years of education received).
Several studies have shown that accumulation of childhood adversity is related to premature mortality. In addition, childhood adversity, and accumulation thereof, is related to risk of suicide, which is one of the most important causes of premature death in adolescence and young adulthood. In a recent study of the DANLIFE cohort, for more than 1 million Danish children born between 1980 and 1998, we showed that trajectories of childhood adversity, which capture both differences in timing as well as frequency of exposure to adversity, were strongly associated with premature mortality in early adult life. We found that young adults who had experienced high levels of adversity throughout childhood and adolescence had a 4·5 times higher risk of all-cause mortality compared with those who had experienced no or few adversities. The most common causes of death were accidents, suicides, and cancer, and, in modelled trajectory groups, the risk for nearly all of these causes was higher for individuals in trajectory groups characterised by childhood adversity, especially the high adversity trajectory group, compared with individuals in the low adversity trajectory group. Childhood adversity is assumed to be related to mortality via socioeconomic mechanisms, the physiological stress response, including neuroendocrine and inflammatory responses, and potentially epigenetic pathways, health behaviours, and mental health.

In the current study, we built on this previous research and examined the relationship between parental education level and all-cause mortality in early adulthood in a total population sample covering all children born in Denmark between 1980 and 2001. In addition, we aimed to quantify how much of the parental education gradient in early adulthood mortality can be explained by experiencing different trajectories of childhood adversity ( appendix p 4 ). We focused on parental education, as we assumed that other indicators of childhood socioeconomic circumstances, such as household income and parental occupational status, were possible effects of parental education status occurring during childhood. Thus, these other measures were instead included in our childhood adversity measure. These analyses benefit from a clear temporal ordering with parental education level measured at birth, childhood adversities measured continuously during childhood, and early adulthood mortality measured from age 16 to 38 years.

Section: Methods

We used data from the DANLIFE cohort study, which was created by linking data from several Danish nationwide registers. Statistics Denmark and the Danish Health Data Authority provide secured access to pseudonymised data from the Danish nationwide registers after an approval procedure. The Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences at the University of Copenhagen (Copenhagen, Denmark) approved the processing of personal data in the DANLIFE study for statistical or scientific purposes on behalf of the Danish Data Protection Agency (record number 514-0641/21-3000). The Danish Data Protection Agency ensures compliance with national and EU legislation. According to Danish law, registry linkage studies do not require informed consent or ethical approval by the Danish National Committee on Health Research Ethics. Every person who is born in Denmark is given a personal identification number that is recorded in all registers, which allows for individual-level linkage of data from various registers as well as linkage between children, parents, and siblings. DANLIFE contains data on multiple childhood adversities, morbidity, mortality, and background information on all children born in Denmark between Jan 1, 1980, and Dec 31, 2015. In the current study, we included children born between Jan 1, 1980, and Dec 31, 2001, who did not emigrate or die before age 16 years and for whom information on parental education level was available. Participants were a maximum age of 38 years at the end of follow-up .
Data on parental education level was extracted from the Population Education Register. Parental education level at birth, as an indicator of socioeconomic circumstances, was defined as the highest education level attained by either parent at the time the child was born. Parental education level was based on the number of years of education that the parent received. It was divided into three levels: low (≤9 years), medium (10–12 years), and high (>12 years). In Denmark, these cutoffs are approximately equivalent to compulsory schooling, secondary school, and higher education.
Twelve different childhood adversities were included in the current study divided into three dimensions: material deprivation, loss or threat of loss, and family dynamics. Material deprivation includes family poverty and parental long-term unemployment. Loss or threat of loss encompasses death of a parent or a sibling and severe somatic illness of a parent or a sibling. Family dynamics covers maternal separation, being placed in foster care, parental or sibling psychiatric illness, and parental alcohol or drug misuse. Childhood abuse is not included. The panel lists the childhood adversities, their definitions, and the register from which they were extracted.
Five trajectory groups of adversities experienced in children aged between 0 and 16 years were previously established by group-based multitrajectory modelling of the annual count of adversities in each of the three dimensions. This grouping was also used in the current study. The low adversity trajectory group contains participants with an overall low exposure to childhood adversities. The early life material deprivation and persistent material deprivation groups comprise participants exposed to material deprivation in early childhood and throughout childhood, respectively. The loss or threat of loss group is mainly characterised by high rates of parental and sibling severe somatic illness and mortality. Finally, the high adversity group contains participants with a high exposure to childhood adversities in all three dimensions.
All individuals were followed up from age 16 years until date of death, date of emigration, or end of follow-up (Dec 31, 2018). Information on mortality and emigration was extracted from the Danish Civil Registration System.
Covariates included sex, parental origin (European or non-European descent), and maternal and paternal age at time of birth (<20 years, 20–30 years, >30 years). Origin of parents was determined based on whether one or both of the child's parents had a European, North American, Australian, or New Zealand nationality (European descent) or whether both parents had another nationality (non-European descent). This division is based on that applied by Statistics Denmark.
To address the aims of this study, we examined the association between parental education level and mortality, and the mediation of this association by childhood adversity trajectories.
For association analyses, we plotted the cumulative overall mortality (ie, 1–Kaplan-Meier survival curve) per 100 000 individuals for the three parental education levels from a participant age of 16 years to the end of follow-up. Individuals emigrating during follow-up were censored at the date of emigration. We then estimated hazard ratios (HR) and hazard differences (HD) per 100 000 person-years for all-cause mortality according to parental education using a Cox proportional hazards model and an Aalen additive hazards model. Age was used as the underlying timescale.
In the mediation analysis, using a counterfactual framework, we quantified the effects of parental education level on mortality acting through the childhood adversity trajectories. The total effect of parental education level on mortality was decomposed into the pure natural direct effect, the pure natural indirect effect, and the mediated interactive effect (schematic overview provided in the appendix p 4 ). The pure natural direct effect is an estimate of the direct effect of parental education level on mortality, which goes through all pathways other than the childhood adversity trajectories. The pure natural indirect effect describes mediation of the association between parental education level and mortality through the five childhood adversity trajectory groups (ie, differential exposure). The mediated interactive effect describes the effect due to an interaction between parental education level and the childhood adversity trajectories on mortality (ie, differential susceptibility).
These effects were estimated by counterfactually changing the parental education level from high education (reference) to medium education and low education. This process was done in five steps. In the first step, we fitted a multinomial logistic regression with the mediator (childhood adversity trajectories) as the dependent variable and the exposure (parental education level) as the independent variable. For every individual, we calculated the probability of the mediator given the exposure. In the second step, we created three replications of the dataset, added the counterfactual parental education level variable to the dataset, and assigned this counterfactual variable the value of high education in the first replication, medium education in the second replication, and low education in the third replication. In the third step, we applied the model fitted in the first step to the new extended dataset and calculated the probability of the mediator with the counterfactual parental education variable as the independent variable instead of the actual parental education variable. In the fourth step, we assigned every observation a weight equal to the ratio of the probability of the mediator given their counterfactual exposure (calculated in the third step) by the probability of the mediator given their actual exposure (calculated in the first step). In the last step, we generated HDs (per 100 000 person-years) using an Aalen additive hazards model with the actual exposure, the counterfactual exposure, and their interaction as independent variables, applying the weights calculated in the previous step. In this model, the pure natural direct effect is equal to the effect of actual parental education level on mortality, the pure natural indirect effect is equal to the effect of the counterfactual parental education level on mortality, and the mediated interactive effect is equal to the interaction of the actual and the counterfactual parental education level on mortality.
We used the computationally efficient bootstrapping approach, bag of little bootstraps (BLBs), to derive effect estimates and 95% CIs for the decomposed effects and total effect. For consistency, we also derived effect estimates and 95% CIs for all-cause mortality according to parental education using BLBs. A detailed description of this approach is given in the appendix (p 2) . The subsets were of size n 0·7 . After derivation of the effect estimates and 95% CIs, the 95% CI around the percentage mediated was calculated. The percentage mediated, through both the pure natural indirect effect and mediated interactive effect, was calculated by using the pure natural direct effect and the total effect, as the pure natural indirect effect, mediated interactive effect, and pure natural direct effect together make up the total effect. To estimate the 95% CI around the percentage mediated, with the percentage being equal to (1–pure natural direct effect/total effect) × 100, we extracted the 2·5th and 97·5th percentiles of the Monte Carlo estimated distribution, where the pure natural direct effect and total effect were sampled from normal distributions (10 000 iterations) using their respective BLB means and SEs as input parameters. This estimation procedure assumes independence between the total effect and pure natural direct effect, and thus produces conservative 95% CIs. However, due to the large sample size of this study and non-symmetrical CIs around the percentage mediated, it was not possible to apply normal bootstraps or BLBs to estimate the 95% CI around the percentage mediated.
Analyses were performed unadjusted and adjusted for parental origin and parental ages at birth. The analyses were additionally stratified by sex to assess potential sex-differences in effects. A low proportion of information was missing on the exposure (0·5%) and any of the covariates (3·3%); therefore, we worked on complete case data for both the unadjusted and adjusted analyses, with participants with data missing on any covariates excluded from the adjusted analysis. Data preparation was done in Stata (version 14.2) and all analyses were conducted in R (version 4.0.3); the package vgam was used for the multinomial logistic regression model, the package survival was used for the Cox model, the package timereg was used for the Aalen model, and the package prodlim was used for the cumulative mortality plots. We smoothed the cumulative mortality plots because of data protection rules, using splines with 10 degrees of freedom. In the results, we discuss point estimates and 95% CIs.
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

The DANLIFE cohort includes 2 223 927 individuals, of whom 1 357 808 were born between Jan 1, 1980, and Dec 31, 2001. The current sample included children born between 1980 and 2001 who did not die or emigrate before age 16 years and who had information on parental education level, giving a final sample of 1 278 156 individuals ( figure 1 ). Among this sample, 1 236 403 (96·7%) individuals had complete information on parental origin and maternal and paternal ages at birth, and were included in adjusted analyses ( figure 1 ). The mean follow-up of all 1 278 156 individuals was 10·8 years (SD 6·2); total follow-up was 13 825 119 person-years. A total of 5387 deaths were registered during follow-up and 97 444 individuals emigrated before the end of follow-up (Dec 31, 2018).
The sample consisted of similar proportions of men (655 633 [51·3%]) and women (622 523 [48·7%]) and nearly all participants were of European descent (1 243 981 [97·3%]; table 1 ). The annual rates of adversities in each of the three dimensions of childhood adversity for each of the five trajectory groups are shown in the appendix (p 5) . A parental education gradient was visible in the distribution of participants over the different childhood adversity trajectory groups ( figure 2 ).
The cumulative overall mortality for the three parental education levels from age 16 years to the end of follow-up is shown in figure 3 . Participants in the medium and low parental education groups versus the high parental education group had higher mortality risk according to HR values. In the unadjusted additive hazards model, in which HD values were equal to number of additional deaths, we calculated a total effect equal to 8·7 additional deaths (95% CI 6·6–10·9) per 100 000 person-years in the medium parental education group and 31·9 (28·5–35·2) per 100 000 person-years in the low parental education group, compared with the high parental education group ( table 2 ).
Differential exposure (pure natural indirect effect) to childhood adversity accounted for 3·2 additional deaths (0·6–5·7) per 100 000 person-years in the medium parental education group and 16·4 additional deaths (11·6–21·1) per 100 000 person-years in the low parental education group. We found no evidence of a mediated interactive effect in either the medium parental education group (HD 0·4 [–2·8 to 3·7]) or low parental education group (HD –1·6 [–8·3 to 5·0]; table 2 ). Mediation, through both differential exposure (pure natural indirect effect) and differential susceptibility (mediated interactive effect), accounted for 41·5% (95% CI 8·0–67·5) of the additional deaths in the medium parental education group and 46·4% (32·9–58·8) in the low parental education group. Results were similar when adjusting the analyses for parental origin and maternal and paternal ages at birth in the subpopulation with complete information on these variables (n=1 236 403). The total effect for both associations was attenuated slightly ( table 2 ), and mediation through both the pure natural indirect effect and mediated interactive effect accounted for 45·8% (3·3–77·3) of the additional deaths in the medium parental education group and 51·3% (34·8–66·3) of the additional deaths in the low parental education group.
Sex-stratified analyses showed that early adult mortality was more frequent among men than among women. In unadjusted and adjusted analyses, we observed a higher number of additional deaths in the medium and low parental education groups, compared with the high parental education group, among men than among women ( appendix pp 3, 6 ). Among women, mortality in the medium parental education group did not seem to be higher than in the high parental education group in adjusted analyses (HD 1·1 [–1·4 to 3·5]; appendix p 3 ). The percentage of additional deaths mediated through childhood adversity in the medium parental education group for men was 34·8% (–5·4 to 64·1). In adjusted analyses, mediation through childhood adversity accounted for 53·2% (35·4–68·9) of the additional deaths in the low parental education group compared with the high parental education group among men, and 46·4% (4·0–79·0) among women, although uncertainty around the estimate for women was high.

Section: Discussion

In a total population sample followed up from birth into early adult life, we identified an inverse relationship between parental education level at birth and mortality risk in early adulthood. We also found that the experience of childhood adversities is an important mechanism through which parental education level influences mortality in early adulthood. Overall, children of parents with lower education are more likely to experience trajectories of adversity over childhood characterized by higher rates of adversity, and such trajectories are related to higher mortality rates in early adulthood. The experience of childhood adversities mediates up to half of the association between parental education level and mortality in early adulthood, although uncertainty around the percentage mediated was high particularly for the medium parental education group. We also tested whether children born into a lower parental education household were more or less susceptible to childhood adversities than children in a high parental education household, but we found no evidence for a mediated interactive effect.
Our findings are in agreement with several studies showing an inverse association between education level of parents and mortality risk of their children. Additionally, our results support previous findings on the association between parental education and childhood adversity, and on the association between accumulation of childhood adversity and premature mortality. This study adds to the existing literature by formally modelling and quantifying the relationships between parental education, childhood adversity trajectories, and early adult mortality in a large population-wide cohort with clear temporal ordering of the exposure, mediator, and outcome.
Parental education level influences the economic, material, and psychosocial conditions in which children grow up, which in turn influence child mortality patterns. Parental education level might affect the environment children are exposed to, prenatally as well as in childhood, their health behaviours, the medical care they are provided with, and their social circle and activities. The results of our study indicate that policies and multifaceted interventions that improve the social determinants of child health might be important in reducing social inequality in early adult mortality. These policies and interventions could involve the education system or, considering a widened range of socioeconomic circumstances, the labour market and the welfare system, with the aims of reducing social gradients in the conditions that influence the early years of a child's life. These policies can also influence downstream conditions such as housing, neighbourhood characteristics, and health care services with the aim of establishing improvements in factors associated with social gradients in society. Improvements in these downstream factors might in turn influence exposure to childhood adversity and the potential consequences of childhood adversity.
In this study, we focused on social and family-related adversity over the course of childhood and adolescence. Childhood adversities might be closely linked with health issues already present during childhood, and future studies could assess whether health issues during childhood and adolescence mediate the association between parental education level and premature mortality in combination with childhood adversities. Obvious early life factors include being born preterm and small for gestational age, as low maternal education is related to an increased risk of being born preterm or small for gestational age, and being born preterm is associated with premature mortality in young adulthood. One plausible pathway for such a relationship is via early adult socioeconomic circumstances, such as educational attainment of young adults, as children with low gestational age tend to have reduced educational attainment. Adding infant and childhood mortality as an outcome in such a study on mediation by birth outcomes would be informative, considering preterm birth is associated with infant mortality.
We excluded the low proportion of children who died before the age of 16 years. Most of these children died within the first year of life (8818 [70·6%] of 12 498), meaning these deaths were unlikely to have been related to the experience of childhood adversity. However, for this reason our results are only applicable to mortality in early adulthood, and not to childhood mortality.
Other potential pathways linking parental education level to early adult mortality involve structural and material factors, behavioural factors, and mental and physical health. Structural and material factors, such as access to health services, adequate housing, and neighbourhood characteristics, could translate into increased early adult mortality rates and constitute upstream determinants of risk of exposure to childhood adversity. Unhealthy behaviours might additionally contribute to the association between parental education level and early adult mortality. However, these behavioural pathways have not been shown to explain a large share of the association between socioeconomic circumstances and health. Childhood mental health problems and common childhood diseases could also explain part of the association and are areas for further research. Indeed our recent analysis showed that children who had experienced high social adversity were likely to also experience many hospitalisations during childhood.
This study has several strengths. The results are based on data from a population-wide, register-based cohort, which was useful in terms of completeness of the dataset and representativeness of the data. Additionally, we have used a comprehensive measure of objectively determined childhood adversities between ages 0 and 16 years. We included 12 different adversities over three dimensions and constructed five trajectory groups that were based on the annual count of adversities in each of these dimensions. These childhood adversity trajectories incorporate information on the type, number, and timing of experienced childhood adversities. Therefore, for the association between parental education level and early adult mortality, the estimated percentage mediated by childhood adversity is likely to be more refined than if we had used a simpler count measure of childhood adversity. Furthermore, we used reliable register-based data on parental education and mortality with clear temporal ordering, and we examined the associations under study using a formal counterfactual-based mediation model. This study shows that in Denmark, the parental education gradient in early adult mortality is mediated by childhood adversity. We assume that this result also applies to other countries, including those with low levels of social security. However, the exact percentage mediated might not be directly generalisable to countries with a different social security system.
The use of register data also means that we were not able to include information on childhood abuse, neglect, or domestic violence, which is a limitation of this study. However, by using information on the annual occurrence of 12 childhood adversities, some of which are expected to be associated with childhood maltreatment, we assume to have captured general patterns of exposure to childhood adversity, which also capture childhood maltreatment to some extent. Another limitation of the current study is that we have only included parental education and not other indicators of socioeconomic circumstances at birth in our analyses. Including these could have strengthened our conclusions, although parental education level has been shown to be the strongest predictor of outcomes related to childbirth. Furthermore, the annual count of low household income and parental unemployment constituted the material deprivation dimension of our childhood adversity trajectories. Including household income and occupational status as exposures in our analyses would therefore have resulted in an artificially strong association between our exposure and mediator.
While mediation analyses rely on the sequential exchangeability assumption, which states that there is no unmeasured confounding, we might not have accounted for all factors that could confound the relationships examined in this study. Potential confounders of the associations for which we were not able to adjust include the circumstances under which parents grew up, genetic factors, and neighbourhood characteristics. Although we do not expect these characteristics to be strong confounders for the mortality of children in adult life, this residual confounding might have resulted in a slightly biased estimation of both the direct and the indirect effect.
Factors during childhood, such as childhood behaviour, could be part of intertwined causal pathways, as they can be a consequence of parental education level and can also influence childhood adversity trajectories. The interaction between health conditions and social conditions and their synergistic effect on health is the focus of the syndemic model of health. In this study, we have shown that individual-level social inequalities at birth are associated with mortality risks in early adulthood through individual-level socioeconomic inequalities during childhood. The exact social and health conditions that result in these different mortality patterns, how these conditions materialise, and the pathways through which they interact, will require further investigation.
In this large population-based study, we show that trajectories of adversity during childhood mediate a considerable proportion of the association of parental education level with mortality in early adulthood. Our results suggest that this mediation is the result of differential exposure to childhood adversity, and not of differential susceptibility to childhood adversity, in the different parental education groups. Although some life events might be unavoidable, public health and policy interventions in early life might reduce the risk of socially patterned premature mortality in early adults. These policies could improve the family living environment, reduce poverty and provide families with more material resources, support parenting, and eventually create more stability and security for both the child and the parent. The present results highlight that concerted policy measures to reduce avoidable social and socioeconomic inequalities are likely to be required to prevent the intergenerational transmission of adversity and poor health.

Section: Data sharing

We are unable to share the individual participant data used for this study. According to the Act on Processing of Personal Data, personally identifiable and sensitive information cannot be made publicly available. Inquiries about secure access to data under conditions stipulated by the Danish Data Protection Agency and requests for summary data should be directed to the principal investigator of the DANLIFE cohort study, Naja Hulvej Rod ( nahuro@sund.ku.dk ).

Section: Declaration of interests

LKE reports funding from the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (Rubicon grant 45219105). DT-R reports funding from the Medical Research Council (Clinician Scientist Fellowship grant MR/P008577/1). All other authors declare no competing interests.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (739.17 KB) Supplementary appendix
