Title: Medications and risk of motor vehicle collision responsibility in British Columbia, Canada: a population-based case-control study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Many medications impair driving skills yet their influence on collision risk remains uncertain. We aimed to systematically investigate the risk of collision responsibility associated with common classes of prescription medications.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this population-based case-control study we analysed linked driving and health records in British Columbia, Canada from Jan 1, 1997, to Dec 31, 2016. The study cohort included all drivers involved in an incident collision (defined as first collision after 3 collision-free years) that resulted in a police report. We scored police collision reports and classified drivers as responsible for the collision (cases) or not responsible (controls); drivers with indeterminate scores were excluded. We used logistic regression to determine odds of collision responsibility in drivers with current prescriptions for medications of interest versus drivers without prescriptions. To explore whether risk of collision responsibility was related to medication effect or driver factors, we compared risk in current medication users versus past users. To study whether drivers developed tolerance to medication effects, we compared risk in new (first 30 days of a prescription) versus established users.

Abstract_Section: Findings

During the study period, 4 906 925 drivers had their driving licence linked to health records; of these drivers, 747 662 unique drivers were involved in 837 919 incident collisions between Jan 1, 2000, and Dec 31, 2016. 382 685 drivers responsible for the collision (cases) and 332 259 drivers not responsible (controls) were included in the final analysis; 122 975 drivers with indeterminate responsibility were excluded. We found increased risk of collision responsibility in drivers prescribed sedating antipsychotics (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 1·35 [98·75% CI 1·25–1·46]), long-acting benzodiazepines (aOR 1·30 [1·22–1·38]), short-acting benzodiazepines (aOR 1·25 [1·20–1·31]), and high-potency opioids (aOR 1·24 [1·17–1·30]). Among medications used for medical indications, the highest risk was seen in drivers prescribed neurological medications: cholinergic drugs (aOR 1·83 [1·39–2·40]), anticholinergic agents for Parkinson's disease (aOR 1·45 [1·08–1·96]), dopaminergic agents (aOR 1·20 [1·04–1·38]), and anticonvulsants (aOR 1·20 [1·14–1·26]). People currently taking benzodiazepines, non-sedating antidepressants, high-potency opioids, and anticonvulsants had increased risk compared with past users, and we did not find increased risk in new compared with established users of these drugs.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

Drivers prescribed benzodiazepines or high-potency opioids are at increased risk of being responsible for collisions and this risk does not decrease over time. Several other classes of medications are associated with increased risk, but this association might be independent of medication effect. These findings can guide medication warnings and prescription choices and inform public education campaigns targeting impaired driving.

Abstract_Section: Funding

Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

Section: Introduction

Many medications cause psychomotor impairment and can contribute to motor vehicle collisions. Controlled experiments show drowsiness, slowed reflexes, impaired tracking ability, and other impairment, with benzodiazepines, non-benzodiazepines (so-called Z-drugs), opiates, antidepressants, antihistamines, and other medications. A group from the Netherlands developed a standardised on-the-road driving test for testing the effects of medications on driving, during which participants drive in traffic and researchers record the degree of weaving (lateral position of the car on the road) and other quantifiable driving skills. This test has been used in randomised controlled trials that have shown antihistamines, antidepressants, opioids, benzodiazepines, and Z-drugs to be associated with driving impairment.
Driving is a complex task and experimental measures of impairment might not correlate with actual collision risk in the real world. Drivers with minor impairment might minimise collision risk through self-regulation of their driving practices. Hence, real-world epidemiological research is required to better quantify the collision risk associated with medication use. A comprehensive review of epidemiological research on this topic identified cohort designs comparing collisions in people taking medication versus those not taking medication, standard case-control designs comparing medication use in drivers involved in a collision with drivers who were not involved in a collision, and case-only designs such as case-crossover studies and responsibility analyses. Cohort studies seldom accounted for road exposure (ie , number of trips or miles travelled). This is an important limitation because people who do not drive are not at risk of collision. Limitations of standard case-control studies include difficulty selecting valid controls who have not been involved in a collision and different methods to ascertain medication exposure in cases versus controls (eg, blood samples in cases and oral fluid in controls).

Many previous studies used pharmacoepidemiological designs that link prescription and traffic collision databases. Because these studies typically involve large numbers of drivers they have statistical power to estimate risk for rarely used medications or medications that cause small increases in collision risk. Pharmacoepidemiological studies typically have information on prescription history, which allows differentiation of the risk associated with acute versus chronic exposure to medications (relevant for studying tolerance). Despite these advantages, few pharmacoepidemiological studies considered collision details, and many included only select populations (eg, drivers older than 67 years). Few studies accounted for important confounders such as road exposure, previous driving record, or underlying illness. Further, most pharmacoepidemiological studies report risk for a single medication or class of medications. This approach might increase the risk of publication bias that would arise if single-medication studies with negative results are not published. Further, few single drug studies accounted for concurrent use of multiple medications; most either adjusted risk estimates for exposure to a small number of other medications or did not adjust for concurrent use of other medications at all.
A source of bias in many previous pharmacoepidemiological studies is inability to account for road exposure. This factor is important because drivers who are prescribed impairing medications might drive less than other drivers because of underlying illness, medication warnings, or self-regulation. Reduced road exposure, in turn, would reduce collision risk. Here we address this limitation of previous studies by using a responsibility analysis approach, which is a type of case-control study that has the advantage of automatically accounting for road exposure by including only drivers who are involved in a collision. Cases are drivers deemed responsible for the collision and controls are those deemed not responsible. Collision responsibility is assigned by objectively scoring detailed crash information, rather than according to legal liability, and scoring is based on whether the driver should have been able to avoid the crash. In theory, drivers deemed non-responsible are representative of other drivers on the road at the time of the collision and, therefore, have the same risk factor profile as roadside controls in a standard case-control study.
In this study, we aimed to systematically investigate the risk of being responsible for a collision associated with common classes of prescription medications. Our primary objective was to compare the risk of collision responsibility in drivers currently taking medications versus drivers not prescribed those medications. Secondary objectives were to explore the role of confounding by indication, and test for evidence of tolerance. This study has no predefined hypothesis.

Section: Methods

We did a responsibility analysis using 20 years of linked population-based driving data, health services data, and prescription data (Jan 1, 1997, to Dec 31, 2016) from British Columbia, a Canadian province with a population of 4·2 million at study midpoint (Jan 1, 2007). In British Columbia, sedating medications are typically dispensed with warnings against operating a motor vehicle, although these warnings are not standardised. People suspected of being medically unfit to drive can be referred to the provincial licensing authority for assessment and might have their driving licences revoked. Licence suspension also applies to drivers with repeated traffic violations. Our study cohort included all drivers involved in an incident collision (defined as first collision after 3 collision-free years) between Jan 1, 2000, and Dec 31, 2016. Non-incident collisions (a collision that occurred less than 3 years after the previous collision) were excluded. We included all collisions that resulted in a police report. Police attendance at collisions in British Columbia is discretionary and police might not attend collisions resulting in property damage only. We analysed collision reports to classify drivers as responsible for the collision (cases) or not responsible (controls), with the assumption that factors causing collisions are over-represented in drivers who are responsible for collisions. Consistent with local ethics rules, participant consent was not required as we used anonymised administrative data. The University of British Columbia research ethics board approved the study. Figure 1 outlines the key definitions used in this study.
We obtained driver records, including driver licensing, police collision reports, and traffic contraventions for all British Columbia drivers from the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, the sole provider of mandatory basic automobile insurance in the province. British Columbia police use a standardised reporting form with drop-down lists to collect uniform information about collision circumstances. We obtained prescription fill data, including medication dispensed, prescription fill date, dose, and days supplied, for all prescriptions filled in a community pharmacy in British Columbia from PharmaNet. PharmaNet is a provincial database that captures all prescriptions filled in a community pharmacy in British Columbia and has minimal misclassification of medication exposure. We broadly classified medications as medical or psychiatric and then subcategorised them according to organ system or most common indication, or both. We obtained additional data from physician billing records (BC Medical Services Plan) and hospital admissions (BC Discharge Abstract Database). These administrative datasets capture all physician billing and hospital admissions in British Columbia's public health system. Probabilistic linkage between driver licence and personal health number was based on name, sex, and date of birth. This linkage was done by data stewards at Population Data BC, and personal identifiers were then replaced by unique study ID numbers ( appendix p 2 ).
We assessed collision responsibility for each driver using police collision reports and a validated scoring system that scores seven factors that plausibly contribute to collisions (road type, road driving conditions, vehicle factors, action of other drivers, difficulty of manoeuvre being performed by index driver at time of collision, obedience of road laws, and collision configuration). Total scores of 16 or more indicate that external factors contributed to the collision and the driver is considered not responsible for the collision. Scores of 13 or below indicate that the main explanation for the collision lay with the driver, and the driver is considered responsible. We excluded drivers with indeterminate scores of 14 or 15.
We fit four binary logistic regression models for each medication class (n=70) to determine the independent risk of collision responsibility in drivers with prescriptions for that class of medications, while simultaneously adjusting for use of medications from other classes. The response variable for all models is collision responsibility (1=responsible, 0=not responsible). Each model had the same collision responsibility outcome and adjustment factors, but medication exposure categorisation and reference group varied ( figure 1 ). We obtained adjusted odds ratios (aORs) CIs, and p values from the model fit. We applied a Bonferroni adjusted significance level of 1·25% and computed corresponding 98·75% CIs to account for multiple inferences related to four exposure classifications. All analyses were done in R version 3.6.1. All significance tests were two-sided.
For model A (primary objective), we categorised driver's medication exposure as current user (prescription overlapped collision date or expired within previous week), past user (prescription expired >7 days before the collision), or non-user (no prescription or previous prescription that expired more than a year before the index collision) and modelled collision responsibility with non-users as the reference group. To explore confounding by indication (model B) we compared current users to past users. To study the possibility that long-term users develop tolerance, we subclassified current users into new users (no prescription 30–365 days before the collision) or established users (had an ongoing prescription 30–365 days before the collision). We used logistic regression to obtain ORs for collision responsibility with established users as the reference group (model C) and with non-users as the reference group (model D).
Each model was adjusted for demographic factors (including age at time of collision and sex; appendix p 3 ), driving record during the 3 years before the collision, breath alcohol concentration (positive vs negative or not recorded in police report), collision characteristics, medical comorbidity in the year before the collision, and exposure to other medication classes. Note that covariates are assigned separately for each incident collision; a driver involved in two separate incident collisions (ie, occurring at different times) will have different covariates for each collision (eg, driver age will have changed; appendix p 3 ).
Because older drivers might be more susceptible to the impairing effects of medications, we repeated models A to D restricted to drivers aged 65 years or older. To assess the effects of excluding indeterminates, we performed sensitivity analyses in which drivers with indeterminate collision responsibility were first coded as responsible and then as not responsible for the collision.
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, writing of the report, or the decision to submit for publication.

Section: Results

During the study period (from Jan 1, 1997, to Dec 31, 2016), 5 136 142 British Columbia residents held a driver's licence and 4 906 925 (95·5%) of these were linked to a personal health number. There were 617 356 police-reported crashes involving 948 812 drivers, of these 948 812 drivers, 747 662 drivers were involved in 837 919 incident crashes and filled 131 259 994 prescriptions during the study period ( figure 2 ). Just over half the incident collisions (427 997 [52·3%] of 837 919) involved property damage only, 392 652 (47·0%) of 837 919 were injury collisions, and 6270 (0·7%) of 837 919 were fatal ( appendix p 3 ). The most commonly prescribed medications were antihypertensives, opioids, and antimicrobials ( table 1 ). The most frequent collisions occurred for drivers using antihypertensives, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; table 1 ). Of the incident collisions, 119 370 (14·2%) of 837 919 were in drivers who were current users of more than one class of medication at the time of the crash ( table 2 ; figure 3 ).
The results of model A showed that several classes of psychiatric medications were associated with increased risk of collision responsibility when comparing current medication users to non-users. Drivers prescribed sedating antipsychotics had the highest risk (aOR 1·35 [98·75% CI 1·25–1·46]), followed by long-acting benzodiazepines (aOR 1·30 [1·22–1·38]), and short-acting benzodiazepines (aOR 1·25 [1·20–1·31]; table 2 , figure 3 ). Among medications used primarily for medical indications, the highest risk was seen in drivers prescribed neurological medications including cholinergic drugs such as donepezil (aOR 1·83 [1·39–2·40]), anticholinergic agents for Parkinson's disease (aOR 1·45 [1·08–1·96]), dopaminergic agents (1·20 [1·04–1·38]), and antiepileptic drugs (aOR 1·20 [1·14–1·26]). We also found increased risk in drivers prescribed high-potency opioids (aOR 1·24 [1·17–1·30]) but a decreased risk in drivers prescribed low-potency opioids (aOR 0·89 [0·86–0·93]). Increased risk was also seen in drivers prescribed bisphosphonates, digoxin, nitrates, and ophthalmological products. In addition to low-potency opioids, we found decreased risk of collision responsibility in drivers prescribed skeletal muscle relaxants, NSAIDs, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), uric acid inhibitors, and systemic antivirals ( table 2 ).
In model B we found that, compared with past users, increased risk of collision responsibility was seen in current users of short and long-acting benzodiazepines, non-sedating antidepressants, high-potency opioids, anticonvulsants, and antibacterial antibiotics. There was decreased risk of collision responsibility in current versus past users of skeletal muscle relaxants, NSAIDs, low-potency opioids, and PPIs ( table 2 ).
The results of model C provided little evidence to suggest that new medication users had higher risk of collision responsibility than established users. By contrast, we found lower risk in new versus established users of low-potency opioids and of high-potency opioids ( table 2 ).
In model D we found that, compared with non-users, there was increased risk of collision responsibility in new users of SSRIs, sedating antipsychotics, and short-acting benzodiazepines ( appendix p 7 ).
Sensitivity analyses that classified drivers as either responsible or not responsible did not substantially effect the magnitude or direction of association for any class of medication ( appendix pp 8, 14 ). Subgroup analyses showed that risk estimates for drivers aged 65 years or older were similar to those for all drivers ( appendix pp 4–7 ).

Section: Discussion

We found, at most, a moderate risk of collision responsibility associated with some medication classes. By comparison, collision risk is more than doubled in drivers with blood alcohol concentration of 0·08% compared with those with no blood alcohol, and it becomes markedly elevated at higher alcohol concentrations. The public health effect of medication-impaired driving, however, might be substantial given that prescription drug use is common. Moreover, our analysis estimated the independent risk associated with each medication class. Drivers using multiple classes of impairing medications (119 370 [14·2%] of 837 919 drivers at time of an incident collision) would probably have a higher risk than those taking just one class.
We found increased risk of collision responsibility in drivers prescribed psychiatric medications—ie, sedating antipsychotics, long-acting benzodiazepines, short-acting benzodiazepines, antidepressants, lithium, non-sedating antipsychotics, Z-drugs. With the exception of lithium and Z-drugs, we also found increased risk in past users ( vs non-users) of these medications, suggesting that some risk is related to driver factors and might be independent of medication effects. To explore this finding further, we compared risk in drivers with active prescriptions with risk in drivers who had prescriptions in the previous year but not at time of collision (model B) and found increased risk in current users of long-acting and short-acting benzodiazepines but not in current users of other psychiatric medications ( appendix p 12 ). Our findings indicate that drivers currently using benzodiazepines have increased collision risk. Drivers prescribed other psychiatric medications are also at increased risk relative to non-users, but this finding might be due to driver comorbidities and driving behaviours that are independent of medication effects.
Our findings are concordant with previous research. A 2011 French responsibility analysis found increased risk of collision responsibility (OR 1·39) in drivers prescribed benzodiazepines. A 2009 meta-analysis found increased risk in drivers using benzodiazepines (OR 1·6). A 2015 review by Gjerde and colleagues found increased collision risk for benzodiazepines in 25 of 28 studies (eg, in the 2013 study by Gjerde and colleagues ), and for antidepressants in eight of ten studies (eg, in the 2011 study by Rapoport and colleagues ). A 2019 Australian responsibility analysis found increased risk of collision responsibility in drivers testing positive for benzodiazepines (OR 3·2) but not in drivers testing positive for antidepressants or antipsychotics.
We found that drivers prescribed high-potency opioids had increased risk of collision responsibility when compared with non-users or with past users. Previous researchers also found increased collision risk associated with opioids. Gjerde and colleagues' 2015 review found increased collision risk associated with opioids in 17 of 25 studies (eg, in the 2018 study by Wickens and colleagues ). A 2017 meta-analysis found pooled ORs of 2·29 for collision risk and 1·47 for collision responsibility in drivers taking prescription opioids. A modified responsibility analysis found that drivers testing positive for prescription opioids had an aOR for initiating a collision of 2·18.
Surprisingly, we found decreased risk of collision responsibility in current users of low-potency opioids or opioid-like medications (codeine, tramadol, and prescription antitussives), when compared with non-users or past users. There is no reason to think that low-potency opioids directly improve driving performance. More plausibly, drivers using these medications compensate by driving more carefully or by not driving while feeling effects of the medications. By contrast, drivers using high-potency opioids might be unable to fully compensate. Another possibility is that drivers with transient painful conditions, for which low-potency opioids are often prescribed, modify their driving behaviour to take fewer risks. Perhaps they drive slower and avoid sudden braking or swerving to prevent body movements that exacerbate musculoskeletal pain.
We found increased risk of collision responsibility in drivers prescribed neurologically active agents such as cholinergic agents, anticholinergic agents, dopaminergic drugs, and antiepileptic drugs ( appendix p 13 ). These drugs are commonly used to treat neurological conditions that could themselves increase risk of collision responsibility (epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease). We found no significant increased risk of collision responsibility in current compared with past users of cholinergic, anticholinergic, or dopaminergic medications, suggesting that risk is more strongly associated with underlying disease than medication effects. By contrast, current users of anticonvulsants had higher risk than past users. This finding might reflect variation in disease severity (eg, past users include patients with well controlled epilepsy who no longer require anticonvulsants). Alternatively, sedation or incoordination caused by some anticonvulsants might present more risk than underlying disease—an interpretation that would only apply to drivers with well controlled epilepsy who are allowed to drive.
We also found increased risk of collision responsibility in drivers prescribed eye drops, digoxin, nitrates, and bisphosphonates. However, there was no evidence of increased risk in current users compared with past users for any of these medications, suggesting that the risk is more likely to be related to the underlying condition than to the drug effect. We found decreased risk of collision responsibility in drivers with active prescriptions for skeletal muscle relaxants, NSAIDs, or PPIs compared with past users or to non-users. Despite these findings, there is no pharmacological explanation to suggest that these medications improve driving performance or reduce risk. More likely, as discussed for low-potency opioids, drivers with transient painful conditions modify their driving behaviour in some other way that reduces risk. The mechanism responsible for these findings is a topic for future research.
With long-term use, people develop tolerance to the impairing effects of opioids, benzodiazepines, and other sedating medications and might be able to drive safely. To test the role of tolerance on risk of collision responsibility, we compared drivers with new versus established prescriptions. With the exception of new users of antihypertensives, we found no evidence that new users of these medications had higher risk than established users. In fact, the converse was true for both low-potency and high-potency opioids (as well as for NSAIDS and skeletal muscle relexants). Sedating medications are dispensed with warnings against driving, and drivers with new prescriptions might initially avoid driving after taking a sedating medication or might intentionally modify their driving behaviour to counter the risks of medication-impaired driving. By contrast, drivers with established prescriptions might become less inclined to take such precautionary measures as medication use becomes more familiar.
This research has several important strengths. Unlike many pharmacoepidemiological studies, responsibility analysis accounts for road exposure since both cases and controls were on the road at the time of collision. Responsibility analyses assume that non-responsible drivers are representative of other drivers on the road at the time of collision and have the same risk factor profile as controls in a standard case-control study. As such, responsibility analyses provide risk estimates similar to well-designed standard case-control studies. Other strengths include our use of population-based data, adjustment for previous driving record, simultaneous study of multiple medication classes, and adjustment for polypharmacy. Moreover, we considered the role of underlying disease by comparing risk in current versus past users and by adjusting for medical history. We also investigated tolerance, by comparing risk in new versus established users. Finally, as we used identical methods to study many medication classes, our findings are ideal for comparing the relative collision risk for different medications, especially for different classes of medications prescribed for the same indication.
This research also has limitations. Sedating medications in British Columbia are typically dispensed with warnings against operating a motor vehicle. Our findings apply to drivers with prescriptions for impairing medications who continue to drive despite these warnings. We suspect that drivers who felt more impaired were less likely to drive than those who felt minimal medication effects. Further, drivers might compensate for minor impairment by driving slower, leaving more headway, or avoiding risky manoeuvres. Hence our results apply to drivers who felt safe to drive while taking medications or who modified their driving behaviour to compensate for minor impairment. Our findings do not apply to drivers who felt more affected and chose not to drive. Although medication effects would not vary, the decision to drive after taking medications might differ between jurisdictions depending on driving culture, medication warnings, and traffic laws and enforcement. Collision responsibility risk associated with medications might differ in jurisdictions where drivers are more (or less) likely to self-regulate their driving when using impairing medications.
Our conclusions about risk might be conservative because misclassification bias might arise from several sources. As for all pharmacoepidemiological studies, we could not verify that drivers were taking medications as prescribed. It is probable that some drivers did not take the prescribed medications, and others took medications after the prescription had lapsed. Similarly, we had no information on non-prescription medications such as sedating antihistamines or medications obtained from other provinces or countries. Furthermore, all drivers in a responsibility analysis were involved in a collision. Given the limitations of assigning collision responsibility after the fact, it is likely that some drivers who were deemed non-responsible (controls) actually contributed to the collision and should have been classified as cases. We did not have data on alcohol or recreational drug use at the time of collision. We partially controlled for this absence by adjusting for a history of impaired driving and for the results of breath alcohol testing when testing was done by police. Similarly, our ability to account for confounding by indication in model B is imperfect: it is likely that the severity of underlying illness would vary in some drivers during the 1-year time period used to define past users. Another limitation is that we did not have data on socioeconomic status and ethnicity and were unable to adjust estimates for these possible confounders. Finally, although medication-related impairment is likely to be dose dependent, our analysis did not explore the effect of dose.
Drivers who use benzodiazepines or high-potency opioids are at increased risk of being responsible for collisions and this risk does not decrease over time. Several other classes of medications are also associated with increased risk, but this association might be due to driver factors independent of medication effect. Health-care providers can use these findings to inform medication warnings and guide prescription choices, especially for patients with borderline fitness to drive. Clinicians who prescribe opioids and benzodiazepines should counsel patients on the risks of driving while using these medications and warn against other risky behaviour such as driving after any alcohol use, speeding, distracted driving, and failure to use seatbelts or motorcycle helmets. Interventions that minimise use of impairing medications might reduce drug-impaired driving and related collisions. Possible interventions include warning labels, patient counselling by physicians and pharmacists, prescription drug monitoring programmes, more restrictive clinical guidelines, incentives for patients and clinicians to avoid prescription of risky medications, and health insurance coverage for non-pharmacological treatments for pain and anxiety.

Section: Data sharing

The data used in this study may be requested from Population Data BC by contacting Tim Choi, Researcher Liaison Unit Lead, at tim.choi@popdata.bc.ca . The request is subject to approval by the Data Stewards representing the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, the British Columbia Ministry of Health Services, and the Vital Statistics Agency of British Columbia. For ethical and privacy reasons, because the data pertain to individuals, the data may only be accessed and statistically analysed on Population Data BC's Secure Research Environment cloud server.

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

This study was funded by a grant from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. JRB's salary is supported by a Health Professional Investigator Award from the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research and by the British Columbia Emergency Medicine Network. All inferences, opinions, and conclusions drawn in this manuscript are those of the authors, and do not reflect the opinions or policies of the Data Stewards representing the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, the British Columbia Ministry of Health, and the Vital Statistics Agency of British Columbia.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (1.68 MB) Supplementary appendix
