Title: Trends in undiagnosed HIV prevalence in England and implications for eliminating HIV transmission by 2030: an evidence synthesis model


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

A target to eliminate HIV transmission in England by 2030 was set in early 2019. This study aimed to estimate trends from 2013 to 2019 in HIV prevalence, particularly the number of people living with undiagnosed HIV, by exposure group, ethnicity, gender, age group, and region. These estimates are essential to monitor progress towards elimination.

Abstract_Section: Methods

A Bayesian synthesis of evidence from multiple surveillance, demographic, and survey datasets relevant to HIV in England was used to estimate trends in the number of people living with HIV, the proportion of people unaware of their HIV infection, and the corresponding prevalence of undiagnosed HIV. All estimates were stratified by exposure group, ethnicity, gender, age group (15–34, 35–44, 45–59, or 60–74 years), region (London, or outside of London) and year (2013–19).

Abstract_Section: Findings

The total number of people living with HIV aged 15–74 years in England increased from 83 500 (95% credible interval 80 200–89 600) in 2013 to 92 800 (91 000–95 600) in 2019. The proportion diagnosed steadily increased from 86% (80–90%) to 94% (91–95%) during the same time period, corresponding to a halving in the number of undiagnosed infections from 11 600 (8300–17 700) to 5900 (4400–8700) and in undiagnosed prevalence from 0·29 (0·21–0·44) to 0·14 (0·11–0·21) per 1000 population. Similar steep declines were estimated in all subgroups of gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men and in most subgroups of Black African heterosexuals. The pace of reduction was less pronounced for heterosexuals in other ethnic groups and people who inject drugs, particularly outside London; however, undiagnosed prevalence in these groups has remained very low.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

The UNAIDS target of diagnosing 90% of people living with HIV by 2020 was reached by 2016 in England, with the country on track to achieve the new target of 95% diagnosed by 2025. Reductions in transmission and undiagnosed prevalence have corresponded to large scale-up of testing in key populations and early diagnosis and treatment. Additional and intensified prevention measures are required to eliminate transmission of HIV among the communities that have experienced slower declines than other subgroups, despite having very low prevalences of HIV.

Abstract_Section: Funding

UK Medical Research Council and Public Health England.

Section: Introduction

Regular assessment of the burden of HIV is essential to evaluate public health policies aimed at reducing transmission, including treatment as prevention and HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis, and to monitor progress towards elimination of HIV transmission by 2030. There is no single international consensus definition of elimination; however, a suggested definition for the UK is zero transmission of HIV within the UK by 2030. Public Health England (PHE) recommends monitoring multiple indicators, including new and late diagnosis, incidence, and undiagnosed prevalence, to assess progress towards the elimination goal. However, incidence and undiagnosed infections are inherently unobservable, so must be estimated.
In the UK, annual estimates of HIV prevalence, both diagnosed and undiagnosed, the number of people living with HIV, and the undiagnosed fraction are published for: gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (GBM); people who inject drugs (PWID); and heterosexual individuals who in the 2011 UK census self-reported as either Black African or as being from any other ethnic groups. The latest report suggests that in 2019, there were an estimated 105 200 (95% credible interval [Crl] 103 300–108 500) people living with HIV in the UK. Of this population, 6600 (4900–9800) or 6% (5–9%) were estimated to be undiagnosed. These estimates are the national indicator for measuring the UK's progress towards the first UNAIDS 90–90–90 by 2020 targets (ie, 90% of all people living with HIV will know their HIV status, 90% of all diagnosed people will receive sustained antiretroviral therapy [ART], and 90% of all ART recipients will have viral suppression), and the first of the updated 95–95–95 by 2025 targets, and for informing HIV testing guidelines and prevention campaigns. In 2019, the UK estimates of the continuum of care were 94% diagnosed, 98% on treatment, and 97% virally suppressed. Since 2005, these estimates of HIV prevalence (providing cross-sectional descriptions of the state of the epidemic) have been derived through a multi-parameter evidence synthesis (MPES)—a Bayesian statistical model that combines and triangulates multiple sources of surveillance and survey data. Information on exposure group sizes, the numbers of people diagnosed and in care, and HIV prevalence from prevalence surveys and testing data, are synthesised to estimate the undiagnosed fraction.

As the epidemic and data sources have changed over time, the MPES model has evolved structurally since its creation, thereby continuing to make efficient use of the available data. This Article shows the latest extension to our MPES model, integrating sequential cross-sectional estimates to produce trends (with uncertainty) from 2013 to 2019 in the number of undiagnosed HIV infections and HIV prevalence (diagnosed and undiagnosed), by route of probable HIV exposure (exposure group), ethnicity, gender, age, and region, focusing on England.

Section: Methods

For this evidence synthesis study, the adult population of England for 2013–19 was stratified by: exposure group and ethnicity (GBM, including GBM who are PWID; PWID who are not GBM; Black African heterosexuals; heterosexuals in other ethnic groups [which means all ethnicities other than Black African, not the UK census Other ethnic group]); gender (men, women); age (15–34, 35–44, 45–59, 60–74 years); and region (London, outside of London). These groups were defined to be mutually exclusive: individuals belonging to more than one group (eg, GBM and PWID) were classified according to a hierarchy of risk factors for HIV (ie, GBM, PWID, heterosexual). The GBM and heterosexual exposure groups were further subdivided by attendance at a sexual health clinic in the past year in relation to a sexually transmitted infection (clinic attendee, not a clinic attendee). PWID were stratified by recency of injection (current, if in the last year; ex-PWID, if more than a year ago).
To estimate HIV prevalence in each stratum, data were combined with prior assumptions in a Bayesian model that encodes the relationships between each data source and the quantities to be estimated. Specifically, the MPES approach consists of: defining the key quantities (known as basic parameters) to be estimated, with pre-existing knowledge of these quantities summarised by prior distributions; relating mathematically the information from each data source to the basic parameters, defining the likelihood of the data; and updating the prior distribution with current knowledge, quantified by the likelihood, to obtain a posterior distribution of all parameters, that summarises all uncertainty in both data and parameters. The posterior distribution of any other unknown quantity of interest, which can be expressed as a function of the basic parameters, can also be derived. This method ensures that resulting estimates are consistent with all included data and model assumptions. We used a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm to draw samples from the posterior distribution, summarised using their median as a point estimate and their 2·5 and 97·5 percentiles as a 95% CrI. Posterior probabilities of a decrease in each outcome during 2013–19 were also calculated, as the proportion of posterior samples that were smaller in 2019 compared with 2013. These posterior probabilities have a literal interpretation of the probability that a decrease has occurred. We assessed the goodness of fit of the model via deviance summaries and in-sample posterior predictive checks comparing the data with the predictive distribution. All analyses were done using R version 4.0.3, rstan 2.21.2, and Stan 2.21.0.
We estimated three basic parameters for each stratum agsrt defined by age group a , exposure group g , gender s , region r, and year t : first, ρ agsrt the proportion of the population in stratum asrt in exposure group g ; second, π agsrt HIV prevalence in stratum agsrt ; and third, δ agsrt the proportion of HIV infections diagnosed in stratum agsrt .
Given knowledge of these basic parameters, any related quantity can be estimated as a function of the basic parameters. The key functional parameters are: the number of people living with HIV in each stratum, N asrt ρ agsrt π agsrt , where N asrt is the total population in stratum asrt ; the number of undiagnosed infections, N asrt ρ agsrt π agsrt (1 – δ agsrt ); and the corresponding undiagnosed prevalence, u agsrt = π agsrt (1 – δ agsrt ).
Data availability was uneven across different strata. Estimates of HIV prevalence π agsrt and the proportion diagnosed δ agsrt for strata with less data were smoothed by borrowing strength from strata with more data, to increase precision. This smoothing was achieved via a hierarchical random effects model, assuming the log odds ratios (LORs) of prevalence and proportion of people diagnosed in those who did not attend clinics versus clinic attendees might plausibly be similar, but not exactly equal, across strata. Smoothing of trends in the LORs across years was achieved by also linking them via a random walk.
A substantial range of evidence is available in England to inform exposure group sizes and HIV prevalence, either directly or indirectly, as summarised together with key assumptions in table 1 . A brief description of the data and their relationships to the parameters follows, with full details given in the appendix (pp 3–28) .
Annual estimates of the total population of England (by age, gender, and region) were available from the UK Office for National Statistics. The 2011 UK census provided information on the proportions of the population by self-reported ethnicity (Black African or any other), which was used to derive the yearly distributions by ethnicity of the heterosexual population. Survey-weighted estimates of the proportion of men who are GBM (by age and region) were available from the third National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3), which was a national stratified probability sample survey for Britain from 2010–12 . Information on PWID (both current and ex) population sizes, based on data from 2005 to 2012, was used to estimate relative group sizes for 2013, which were assumed not to change over time. The sizes of the clinic-attending subgroups of GBM and heterosexuals by ethnicity, for each year 2013–19, were available from the Genitourinary Medicine Clinic Activity Dataset, a disaggregated, pseudonymised data return to PHE submitted by all commissioned sexual health services across England. The appendix (p 8) gives details of the group size parameters, their prior distributions or functional forms, and which datasets informed them.
The sexual health clinic data also provided yearly indirect evidence on HIV prevalence, both diagnosed and undiagnosed, in clinic attendees. Four components of HIV prevalence can be derived from these data combined with model assumptions: previously diagnosed prevalence; newly diagnosed prevalence; prevalence of undiagnosed infection in attendees not offered an HIV test; and prevalence of undiagnosed infection in attendees opting out of an HIV test ( appendix p 8 ). The data directly inform the diagnosed components, whereas the undiagnosed prevalences were estimated by relating them to newly diagnosed prevalence. The Gay Men's Sexual Health Survey samples GBM at community venues in London every 2–3 years. Participants are offered an HIV test and asked about their sexual health service attendance during the past year and any previous HIV diagnosis. Since participants might be at higher risk of acquiring HIV than GBM in general, this source overestimates HIV prevalence in all GBM. The data were therefore used indirectly, to inform the odds ratio (OR) of (previously) undiagnosed prevalence in clinic-attending versus other GBM ( appendix p 9 ). The Unlinked Anonymous Monitoring annual survey of PWID recruits attendees at drug services and involves a (self-reported) questionnaire and HIV test. The survey provided information on HIV prevalence, π agsrt , and the proportion of PWID living with HIV who have ever had an HIV diagnosis, δ agsrt , for each year 2013–19. The sampled population was assumed to represent current PWID. For the ex-PWID group, we assumed that the proportion living with HIV whose infection had been diagnosed was larger than for current PWID ( appendix p 9 ).
The UK National Study of HIV in Pregnancy and Childhood collects data on all HIV diagnoses among pregnant women. Information on diagnoses occurring during pregnancy was combined with data from the UK Office for National Statistics on the annual number of livebirths, to inform previously undiagnosed prevalence in non-PWID women younger than 45 years ( appendix p 10 ), by ethnicity, age, and region. The African Health and Sex Survey, done across England in 2014, provided information on the proportion of African people living with HIV who self-reported ever having had an HIV test. We used these data to inform the male-to-female OR of the proportion diagnosed in Black African heterosexuals ( appendix p 10 ). UK National Health Service Blood and Transplant and PHE test blood donors for blood-borne viruses, with results available by gender, region, and age. The HIV prevalence in this population, which is considered to be at very low risk of HIV infection, informed the male-to-female OR of HIV prevalence in heterosexuals who were not clinic attendees ( appendix p 10 ).
The HIV/AIDS Reporting System records all new HIV diagnoses, and the clinical status of all patients diagnosed HIV-positive who attend HIV outpatient services for care. These data informed the number of people living with diagnosed HIV, by ethnicity, age, gender, region, and year, and the probable HIV-exposure group distribution of these individuals ( appendix p 11 ). The exposure group recorded does not distinguish between current PWID and ex-PWID, or by clinic attendance. The numbers of people diagnosed were therefore expressed as sums of the numbers in the component subgroups.
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

In England, the estimated number of people living with HIV aged 15–74 years who were unaware of their infection decreased from 11 600 (95% CrI 8300–17 700) in 2013 to 5900 (4400–8700) in 2019, posterior probability 0·996 ( table 2 ). This decrease corresponded to a halving in undiagnosed HIV prevalence from 0·29 (0·21–0·44) to 0·14 (0·11–0·21) per 1000 population during the study period. The decreases in number of people living with undiagnosed HIV and undiagnosed HIV prevalence were greater in London than outside of London ( table 2 ). Similarly, probabilities of a decrease were higher for clinic attendees than for people who did not attend clinics ( figures 1–3 ). An increase in the number of people living with diagnosed HIV resulted in the total number of people living with HIV rising from 83 500 (80 200–89 600) to 92 800 (91 000–95 600) in 2013–19. The percentage of people living with HIV whose infection was diagnosed therefore steadily increased from 86% (80–90%) in 2013 to 94% (91–95%) in 2019, reaching the UNAIDS 90% diagnosed target in 2016, and even earlier, in 2013, for Black African heterosexuals ( figure 4 ). Overall, the burden of HIV, both diagnosed and undiagnosed, was concentrated in the group aged 45–59 years, with the number of people living with HIV within this age group steadily increasing between 2013 and 2019 across all subgroups ( appendix p 33 ).
A closer look at each subgroup revealed considerable variability in the pace of reduction of undiagnosed infections ( table 2 ; appendix p 30 ). The decrease in the number of GBM living with undiagnosed HIV was notable in all subgroups ( figure 1 ), with the total more than halving from 7100 (4000–13 200) in 2013 to 2900 (1600–5300) in 2019 (posterior probability 0·986; table 2 ). The corresponding undiagnosed prevalence dropped from 13·9 (8·0–25·3) to 5·4 (3·1–9·8) per 1000 population, with similar decreases within and outside of London ( figure 4 ). The number of GBM living with undiagnosed HIV was largest, but also most uncertain, among those aged 15–34 years, with probabilities of a decrease lowest in clinic attendees (posterior probability 0·700 in London, 0·767 outside of London). The decrease in undiagnosed prevalence for this age group of clinic attendees was more pronounced (posterior probability 0·809 in London, 0·915 outside of London). The disparity in regional trends was greatest among people aged 60–74 years, with posterior probabilities of a decrease estimated to be 0·856 in London and 0·754 outside of London.
Because of small sample sizes, estimates of the number of PWID living with undiagnosed HIV were uncertain, with the probability of any decrease during 2013–19 lower than in other groups (posterior probability 0·633; table 2 ). Undiagnosed prevalence among PWID remained seven times higher than that of all heterosexuals in 2019 ( table 2 ).
Progress in reducing the proportion undiagnosed among Black African heterosexuals was more evident than for people of other ethnicity ( figures 2–3 ), particularly in London. Overall, the number of Black African heterosexuals unaware of their HIV infection decreased during 2013–19 from 2200 (1800–2900) to 1200 (900–1600), corresponding to almost a halving in undiagnosed prevalence from 3·3 (2·6–4·2) to 1·7 (1·3–2·3) per 1000 population ( table 2 ). The decrease in the number of people aged 45–59 years living with undiagnosed HIV, both those attending clinics (posterior probability 0·615) and not attending clinics (0·523), during the study period, was marginal, whereas undiagnosed prevalence in the clinic-attending group decreased from 38 (22–64) to 20 (12–31) per 1000 population (posterior probability 0·960). This decrease reflects a substantial increase during the same period in the denominator of clinic attendees, from 3600 (3500–3700) to 6000 (5900–6200).
Although the 90% target was achieved by 2017 for most subgroups, including both Black African heterosexuals and heterosexuals in other ethnic groups as a whole, the target was not reached until 2019 for other ethnicity heterosexuals outside of London who were clinic attendees. Furthermore, there was less evidence than for other subgroups of an increase in the percentage diagnosed with HIV for other ethnicity heterosexuals ( appendix p 30 ), as reflected by the uncertainty in the estimates of the number undiagnosed ( figure 3 ). The total number of other ethnicity heterosexuals living with undiagnosed HIV reduced from 2000 (1500–3300) to 1600 (1100–3100; posterior probability 0·760) during 2013–19, with a corresponding drop in undiagnosed prevalence from 0·052 (0·039–0·085) to 0·041 (0·028–0·077) per 1000 population ( table 2 ). However, such a decrease was not discernible in the two older age groups in this subpopulation outside London, particularly in people who were not clinic attendees ( appendix pp 36–37 ). Despite an estimated decline in the number of people living with undiagnosed HIV among clinic-attending heterosexuals of other ethnicity, the undiagnosed prevalence in this group remained much larger than for those of other ethnic groups who did not attend a clinic ( appendix pp 36–37 ).
For all heterosexuals, trends in the number of people living with HIV unaware of their infection were similar for men and women ( appendix pp 31–32 ), although among Black African clinic-attending heterosexuals, consistently higher numbers of women than men remained undiagnosed ( appendix p 31 ).

Section: Discussion

In England, GBM, PWID, and Black African heterosexuals remain disproportionately affected by HIV, with considerably higher undiagnosed prevalence per population in 2019 than other ethnicity heterosexuals. We have shown that this prevalence has decreased remarkably from 2013 to 2019, with the first 90 of the UNAIDS 90–90–90 targets achieved in 2016 among people aged 15–74 years in England. The estimated number of people living with HIV unaware of their infection halved to 5900 (4400–8700) during the study period, with similar reductions estimated in all GBM and most Black African heterosexual subgroups.
However, there were three less encouraging findings from our analysis. First, undiagnosed prevalence outside London is not decreasing as fast as in London. Second, although sexual health clinics provide free and confidential HIV testing to all clinic attendees, we estimated that among heterosexuals of an ethnicity other than Black African, undiagnosed prevalence in clinic attendees in 2019 was more than 30 times greater than in those who had not attended in the past year. This disparity implies that many opportunities for testing clinic attendees are being missed. Indeed, the latest PHE report on HIV testing found that of eligible clinic attendees who were not either GBM, Black African, or born in a high-prevalence country, the proportion declining an HIV test had increased during the previous 5 years, to 27% in 2016. Third, despite the small magnitude of undiagnosed prevalence in heterosexuals of other ethnicity than Black African who did not attend a clinic, we estimated low (40%) probability of a decrease between 2013 and 2019, albeit with large uncertainty in the estimates ( figure 3 ).
Our MPES approach integrates the most recently available datasets to provide estimates of the latest trends in the unobserved burden of HIV in England. A key strength of our model is the quantification of temporal changes in different population strata, which is crucial to prioritising policies and monitoring progress towards elimination of HIV transmission. Our estimates rely on model assumptions to identify unobservable quantities, for example, relating undiagnosed prevalence to new diagnoses and smoothing constraints to address data sparsity. We judge these assumptions to be plausible, particularly because robustness is ensured by appropriately allowing for uncertainty. For example, in the estimation of prevalence from the sexual health data, we allowed for the dynamic nature of prevalence by assuming that within each year, prevalence lay between the year-start and year-end prevalence. Model assessment via deviance summaries and posterior predictive checks revealed a very good fit of the model to almost all of the data sources used ( appendix pp 47–74 ). We found some slight lack of fit to the prevalence and group size data on PWID groups, and to the HIV diagnosis data for young GBM. However, the small PWID sample sizes and the large GBM sample sizes both result in absolute differences between the point estimate and data that do not have any practical public health meaning, relative to the uncertainty in the estimates.
A consequence of the HIV epidemic and available data sources evolving over time is the continuing adaptation of the MPES model. One outstanding issue is that the population using opiates, including PWID, is thought to be ageing, so that the age–gender distribution assumed might be outdated. However, given the low and uncertain estimates of absolute numbers of people living with HIV among PWID, our overall estimates are reasonably robust to this ageing. Changes in migration and other population patterns might also have occurred, such that group sizes have changed since the UK Office for National Statistics census and the Natsal-3 survey were done in 2011. Newer data sources are therefore being sought to supplement the evidence base for subsequent years, with accompanying model development to make better and more efficient use of existing and new data sources. This ongoing work includes a new round of the Natsal survey in 2021–22, updating estimates of the PWID population size, incorporation of information from community and online surveys, extending the MPES model to datasets collected by the other UK countries, and extending the model to propagate the uncertainty in the proportion diagnosed to the rest of the continuum of care—ie, the proportions treated and virally suppressed. Finally, a few of the data sources used (African Health and Sex Survey, Gay Men's Sexual Health Survey, and the Unlinked Anonymous Monitoring study of PWID ) rely on self-report of previous HIV diagnosis, which might be biased, owing to a reluctance to disclose awareness of status. However, we limited the possible effect of such bias by using data from the two community surveys indirectly, via ORs of either the proportion of HIV infections diagnosed or the undiagnosed prevalence in one group compared with another group. Furthermore, the self-reported proportion diagnosed observed in the PWID study is assumed to be a lower bound for the actual proportion diagnosed.
Other approaches have been used to estimate trends in the number of undiagnosed HIV infections in England. First, a back-calculation approach, using data on diagnoses over time and CD4 cell count close to time of diagnosis, generates estimates of the number of GBM living with undiagnosed HIV that are consistent with ours, providing a complementary understanding of the HIV epidemic in this group. For the MPES approach, incorporating CD4 cell counts at diagnosis to further validate our undiagnosed prevalence estimates would be complicated by having to account for migration to and from the UK (as indeed the back-calculation approach was). Estimates from PHE show that, in the past decade, the majority of heterosexual migrants who are diagnosed in the UK are likely to have acquired HIV outside the UK, before migration. Migrants might, or might not, have already been diagnosed and on treatment at the time of migration. Furthermore, differential rates of migration into particular regions might influence the proportion of people living with undiagnosed HIV.
Second, estimates of the number of people living with HIV from transmission modelling, aimed at forecasting the epidemic and the effects of different possible interventions—particularly in the GBM population—are broadly consistent with our estimates. Third, the UNAIDS Estimation and Projection Package (a mathematical model of transmission and demographic dynamics to derive prevalence and incidence) provides similar estimates of undiagnosed HIV prevalence in key groups (Kirwan PD, unpublished).
Our estimates have important implications for efforts to eliminate HIV transmission in England and the UK, providing crucial context to the 90–90–90 metrics and key estimates of undiagnosed prevalence for monitoring progress in particular subgroups. Diagnosing HIV infections in heterosexuals of other ethnic groups, especially outside of London, is particularly challenging, whether or not they attend a clinic; the large population and low undiagnosed prevalence imply that in general, members of this group might have no particular reason to consider themselves at risk of HIV, so finding and encouraging those who are at risk to attend and test is not simple. Given that undiagnosed prevalence in heterosexuals of other ethnic groups who were clinic attendees during the past year is more than 30 times greater than in those who had not attended during this period ( appendix p 37 ), the priority must be to ensure that all sexual health clinic attendees are offered and encouraged to accept an HIV test, regardless of ethnicity, rather than the 73% that currently do test. If clinic attendees living with HIV increasingly are diagnosed, and improved partner notification is used to accelerate reduction of the undiagnosed fraction of the wider population, the prospect of eliminating HIV transmission becomes increasingly likely.

Section: Data sharing

Relevant data on which this analysis is based are available on request to PHE in accordance with PHE's HIV and STI data sharing policy at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hiv-and-sti-data-sharing-policy. All requests for data access will need to specify the planned use of data and will require approval from PHE before data release.

Section: Declaration of interests

HM was a PHE technical advisor on the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence pending guideline on Reducing sexually transmitted infections (GID-NG10142). All other authors declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

AMP, PDK, CHJ, and DDA were funded by the UK Medical Research Council (unit programme number MC_UU_00002/11). DDA was also funded by Public Health England (PHE). AM, SC, RJH, EH, HM, AEB, VD, and ONG were employed by PHE when this manuscript was submitted. We thank Dr Stefano Conti (National Health Service England), Louise Logan, Dr Stephanie Migchelsen, Katy Davison, Sophie Nash, Dr Zheng Yin, Dr Nicky Connor, and everyone in the Blood Safety, Hepatitis, Sexually Transmitted Infections and HIV Division at PHE; Prof Cath Mercer (University College London [UCL]), Dr Ford Hickson (London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine [LSHTM] and Sigma Research), and Prof Claire Thorne (UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health) for providing data and constructive discussion. We acknowledge all of the participants of a stakeholder engagement event, whose contributions to the discussions informed model developments aimed at making greater and more efficient use of available data. This event was held at LSHTM in 2016 and was coordinated by Dr Catherine Dodds (LSHTM and Sigma Research), Deborah Gold (UK National AIDS Trust), Dr Valerie Delpech (PHE), and Prof Daniela De Angelis (UK Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit).

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (4.77 MB) Supplementary appendix
