Title: Disparities in stage at diagnosis for five common cancers in China: a multicentre, hospital-based, observational study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Stage information is crucial for cancer care and essential to improve polices for cancer control. However, the distribution of stage at diagnosis for common cancers in China is not well known. We aimed to identify the distribution and factors associated with stage at diagnosis for five major cancers in China.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this multicentre, hospital-based, observational study, we included 23 hospitals in 12 provinces from China. We focused on cancers of the lung, stomach, oesophagus, colorectum, and female breast, and using electronic medical records at the individual level from the local hospitals, and cancer registration records from population-based cancer registries, identified diagnoses made between Jan 1, 2016, and Dec 31, 2017. We collected information on sociodemographic characteristics, lifestyle factors, insurance types, and stage at diagnosis. We analysed the prevalence of late-stage (stages III–IV) cancer cases overall, by sex, and by geographical region. We used logistic regression to identify the factors that were associated with late stage at diagnosis. We further compared these estimates with data from the USA using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database.

Abstract_Section: Findings

We included 52 103 eligible patients. Among 41 671 patients with known stage at diagnosis, 22 009 (52·8%) were diagnosed with late-stage cancer. The proportion of late-stage cases was higher in men and boys than in women and girls (14 084 [64·1%] of 21 973 vs 7925 [40·2%] of 19 698 patients; diagnosed at stages III–IV; adjusted odds ratio [OR] 1·3, 95% CI 1·2–1·5). There is a persistent diagnostic disparity between rural and urban areas (adjusted OR 1·2, 1·1–1·4). Patients with the new rural cooperative medical scheme insurance had a significantly higher risk of late-stage diagnosis compared with patients with urban insurance (adjusted OR 1·4, 1·1–1·9). By specific cancer type, sex and rural–urban disparities were the largest in lung cancer. Compared with the USA, our study patients had a higher percentage of stage II–IV breast cancer (72·4% in China vs 48·8% in the USA), lung cancer (82·7% in China vs 74·7% in the USA), and colorectal cancer (84·8% in China vs 75·9% in the USA).

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

The disparities of cancer diagnosis within China, and between China and the USA, indicate an urgent need for early detection of cancer in China.

Abstract_Section: Funding

National Key R&D Programme of China, Major State Basic Innovation Programme of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, and National Natural Science Fund.

Section: Introduction

Cancer accounts for a significant burden of disease in China. Despite substantial gains in survival of patients with cancer in China, gaps in survival time still exist between China and high-income countries, such as the USA. Within China, the urban and rural disparity in cancer outcomes is evident, reflected by lower incidence but higher mortality rate in rural areas than in urban areas. People with lung cancer, colorectal cancer, stomach cancer, and breast cancer consistently have a lower survival rate in rural areas than in urban areas.
The stage at diagnosis strongly influences the treatment strategies and prognosis of patients with cancer. Compared with patients with late-stage cancer, those diagnosed with early-stage diseases are more likely to receive curative treatments and are substantially more likely to have a better prognosis. Identifying stage distribution and factors associated with disease diagnosis might help to close the survival gap between different populations and improve cancer prognosis.
Cancer stage at diagnosis in China at a population level is not available because this information is not routinely collected by cancer registries. Previous studies on cancer stage at diagnosis in China were limited to small samples from one or a small number of hospitals, focusing on a single cancer type. Given the importance of information on cancer stage at diagnosis and treatment, the China National Central Cancer Registry initiated a multicentre, hospital-based, cancer registration programme in 2016, aiming to improve patient care through evaluation of cancer outcomes. To fill the evidence gap, the primary aim of our study was to identify the distribution and factors associated with stage at diagnosis for five major cancers (lung cancer, oesophageal cancer, stomach cancer, colorectal cancer, and breast cancer) in China. The second aim was to compare the cancer stage profile to patients diagnosed during the same period in the USA with the database from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) programme. The results will inform disparities of cancer diagnosis within China, and between China and the USA.


Section: Methods

We followed the RECORD statement guidelines to report our observational study ( appendix pp 3–9 ). The National Central Cancer Registry is the only national agency that serves as the primary source of statistics on cancer in China. Since 2016, a multicentre, hospital-based cancer registration programme has been implemented in China by the National Central Cancer Registry, aiming to collect detailed, high-quality cancer data on patients’ lifestyle factors, including smoking history, drinking history, family history of cancer, pathological stage at diagnosis, clinical stage at diagnosis, grade, and detailed first-course treatment options, which were not previously available through population-based cancer registries ( appendix p 10 ). To capture high-quality data, we first selected 25 areas in 13 provinces that have high-quality, population-based cancer registration data across six geographical regions of China (north, northeast, northwest, east, central, and south), covering both urban and rural areas, representing different socioeconomic status and lifestyles in the country ( appendix p 13 ). Given that most patients with cancer would choose specialised or large general hospitals for cancer treatment, we then selected the largest specialised cancer hospitals within these areas with the capacity and willingness to participate in our study. If there was no specialised cancer hospital, the region's largest general hospital was prioritised. This report does not contain patient identifiable data. Therefore, we do not need consent from the individuals.
Using electronic medical records at the individual level from the local hospitals, and cancer registration records from population-based cancer registries, we identified all eligible cases diagnosed with first primary, invasive cancer between Jan 1, 2016, and Dec 31, 2017, and whose home address was in the selected areas. We excluded individuals with in-situ tumours. We used the third edition of the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology topography for case identification: lung cancer (C34·0–C34·3, C34·8–C34·9), oesophageal cancer (C15·0–C15·5, C15·8–C15·9), stomach cancer (C16·0–C16·6, C16·8–C16·9), colorectal cancer (C18·0–C18·9, C19·9, C20·9, C21·0–C21·2, C21·8), and breast cancer (female only; C50·0–C50·6, C50·8–C50·9). We selected these cancers because they are common, amenable to screening, and can be treated with curative intent in the early stage. Cases within any of the following categories were eligible: (1) diagnosed at these hospitals during the period; (2) diagnosed and treated at these hospitals; (3) diagnosed elsewhere but received all or part of the first course of therapy at these hospitals. Following protocol, physicians in each hospital had face-to-face interviews with the patients using a standardised questionnaire to collect patient-level data, including registered permanent residence, name, sex, age at diagnosis, basis and certainty of diagnosis, marital status, smoking history, drinking history, family history of cancer, and health insurance status ( appendix p 11 ). A person who had smoked at least 100 cigarettes in his or her lifetime was defined as an ever smoker. Ever drinkers were defined as those who were drinking at least 25 g of ethanol per week that lasted for at least 1 year. We classified the status of insurance into three categories: urban insurance (including urban residence basic medical insurance and urban employment-based basic medical insurance), new rural cooperative medical scheme (NCMS) insurance, and others.
The Tumour–Node–Metastasis staging system (7th edition) maintained by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) was used for staging abstraction. We extracted detailed information on pathological and clinical stage from the electronic medical records, pathological reports, imaging tests, and surgical reports. We further abstracted each patient's location of the primary tumour, tumour size (in millimetres) and tumour extent, lymph node involvement, and status of distant metastasis, which were used for deriving the AJCC staging information. The abstraction took place at least 1 year after discharge to ensure that we captured the complete and accurate stage at the time of diagnosis and first-course treatment information in the hospital. In the process of stage grouping, we started by assessing the presence or absence of distant metastasis. If distant metastasis was documented, stage IV was then defined regardless of the absence of the T stage or N stage. For patients who received surgery as the first treatment regimen, cancer stage was initially established on the basis of available information on the pathological stage. If data on pathological stage were missing, clinical stage data were used instead. For patients who received chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or immunotherapy as first treatment, clinical stage at diagnosis was prioritised. Cases were identified as stage unknown if both pathological and clinical stage information were missing ( appendix p 23 ). All cancer registries submitted their local data at the end of July, 2019. We obtained ethical approval for this study from the institutional review board of the Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.
To ensure data quality, we established a standardised study protocol. We defined the data structure, data contents, abstracting methods, staging criteria, and file transmission procedures in the protocol. We did a series of training programmes for those registrars on the rationale of abstracting, coding, and staging. The hospital records were reviewed in each local hospital by local clerks. We further did data quality control after abstraction: adherence to protocol and logical checks. We used IARCcrgTools to assess the quality and completeness of the cancer registration data. We applied automatic consistency checking procedures, which issue a warning or error when inconsistent data entry is detected. We also checked the consistency of combinations of variables for all records submitted, and detected records with impossible combinations. We provided each registry with a detailed report of quality control and required correction of data. We rechecked resubmitted data using the same procedures.
To compare the stage distribution with that in the USA, we obtained stage information for patients from 18 registries using the SEER database (2019 submission data). We used SEER*Stat (version 8.3.8) to generate a case listing. We extracted eligible first primary cancer records diagnosed between Jan 1, 2016, and Dec 31, 2017. from the SEER database according to the same criteria applied in the Chinese patients. AJCC 7th edition staging information was extracted from the SEER database to ensure comparability.
The distribution of stage at diagnosis was examined overall and by sex and residence. We analysed all cancers combined and separately for each cancer type. The outcome of interest was late stage at diagnosis, defined as stages III–IV. We used χ 2 tests to evaluate the association between the candidate covariates and stage distribution as well as the missingness of stage. We reported unadjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs using logistic regression. Given that the patients were clustered within hospitals, for each cancer type, we reported adjusted ORs and 95% CIs using multiple logistic regression, adjusting for hospital (cluster) effect, hospital type, hospital level, sex (excluded in breast cancer model), age at diagnosis, place of residence, smoking history, drinking history, family history of cancer, and health insurance status on the basis of the significance of χ 2 tests and previous knowledge ( appendix pp 12, 17–18 ). For all cancers combined, we additionally included cancer type in the multiple regression model.
To verify the robustness of our results, we did several sensitivity analyses. First, we repeated the logistic regression analyses by using different classification (stages II–IV vs stage I), because many studies used a more strict definition to classify early stage. Second, to test whether excluding data from two hospitals in Haining and Zhongshan, China, might introduce any bias of the results, we added data from these two hospitals and repeated the analyses.
For between-country comparison, we compared the stage completeness and distribution between China and the USA. Given that the population structure showed difference between countries, we further showed age-standardised distribution of stage at diagnosis for each cancer type between countries using the population structure of the US patients in our study. For all cancers, we generated an index of stage distribution as a weighted average of the age group at diagnosis, sex, and type of cancer, and made a between-country comparison.
We did multiple logistic regressions with adjustment of cluster effect using SAS (version 9.4). We did all other analyses using the R software (version 4.0.2). All statistical tests were two-sided, and p values less than 0·05 were considered statistically significant.
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

We show the geographical location and basic information of 25 areas and hospitals in 13 provinces across six geographical regions ( appendix pp 13–14 ). The 25 hospitals submitted a total of 54 888 records. All data from the two hospitals in Haining and Zhongshan were excluded from the final analysis due to high percentages of unknown stage at diagnosis (62·2% and 57·6%). The other 23 hospitals from 23 areas in 12 provinces submitted a total of 53 166 records ( figure 1 ). We excluded records of patients who were treated before 2016 or not initially treated at those hospitals (n=544), duplicates (n=3), records without any detailed diagnostic information (n=25), and records with in-situ tumours (n=491). After these exclusions, we included a total of 52 103 cases (98·0%) in the final analysis ( figure 2 ).
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the study population overall and by cancer type are shown in table 1 . 37 950 (72·8%) of 52 103 eligible patients with cancer were living in urban areas and 28 802 (55·3%) were men and boys. The mean age of the patients overall was 60·9 years (SD 11·1). 10 285 (19·7%) patients had a family history of cancer. 19 190 (36·8%) patients had a history of smoking and 12 787 (24·5%) had a history of drinking. 25 180 (48·3%) patients had urban insurance and 11 960 (23·0%) had NCMS insurance. The largest patient group had lung cancer (18 353 [35·2%]), followed by female patients with breast cancer (9398 [18·0%]), stomach cancer (9337 [17·9%]), colorectal cancer (8322 [16·0%]), and oesophageal cancer (6693 [12·8%]). The detailed characteristics of the study population were further shown by sex ( appendix pp 15–16 ).
The percentage of unknown stage for all cancers combined was 20·0% (n=10 432; table 1 ). The proportion with unknown stage varied across cancer types and areas ( appendix pp 17–18 ). 8294 (19·9%) of 41 671 patients with known stage had stage I cancer, 11 368 (27·3%) had stage II, 12 172 (29·2%) had stage III, and 9837 (23·6%) had stage IV. 22 009 (52·8%) of 41 671 patients presented with stages III–IV for all cancers combined. By cancer site, patients with breast cancer had the least proportion of stages III–IV (1897 [21·6%] of 8767), whereas patients with lung cancer had the highest proportion of stages III–IV (9455 [67·4%] of 14 024; table 1 , figure 3 ).
The proportion of stage III–IV cases was higher in men and boys than in women and girls for all cancers combined (14 084 [64·1%] of 21 973 vs 7925 [40·2%] of 19 698 patients; adjusted OR 1·3, 95% CI 1·2–1·5). The sex disparity was especially striking for late-stage lung cancer (adjusted OR 1·7, 1·3–2·1) and oesophageal cancer (adjusted OR 1·4, 1·0–1·8; figure 3 A, table 2 ), which showed higher prevalence in men and boys. However, there was no significant difference between sexes in late-stage prevalence of stomach or colorectal cancers. For all cancers combined, patients in rural areas had a higher proportion of late-stage diagnosis than in urban areas (adjusted OR 1·2, 1·1–1·4). And the rural–urban gap was most prominent for lung cancer (adjusted OR 1·5, 1·1–2·0), followed by breast cancer (adjusted OR 1·2, 1·0–1·4; figure 3 B, table 2 ).
The relationship between cancer stage and age showed differences by cancer type. Patients with stomach cancer who were 75 years or older had a higher risk of developing late-stage cancer than patients younger than 55 years. For colorectal cancer, young patients had a significantly higher risk of late-stage diagnosis than the older patients ( table 2 ).
History of smoking and drinking was significantly associated with late-stage diseases for all cancers combined. The adjusted OR between smoking and late-stage diagnosis of lung cancer was 1·3 (95% CI 1·0–1·7). Drinking was significantly associated with late-stage diagnosis of oesophageal cancer (adjusted OR 1·3, 1·1–1·5). In addition, a family history of cancer was inversely associated with risk of late-stage disease consistently for cancers of the lung and stomach. Patients with NCMS insurance had a higher risk of late-stage diagnosis compared with patients with urban insurance for all cancers combined (adjusted OR 1·4, 1·1–1·9). The adjusted OR for late-stage diagnosis of lung cancer for those with NCMS insurance compared with urban insurance was 2·6 (1·8–3·8; table 2 ).
In the sensitivity analyses, we defined late stage as stages II–IV ( appendix pp 19–20 ). Sex, smoking history, and health insurance showed stronger association with prevalence of stages II–IV than stage I disease. There was an association between NCMS insurance and late-stage diagnosis for all cancers combined (adjusted OR 1·8, 95% CI 1·5–2·3). By cancer type, NCMS insurance was significantly associated with stage II–IV diseases consistently for lung cancer, stomach cancer, and breast cancer. Other characteristics showed similar associations with late stage at diagnosis to the main analyses. When adding data from the two previously excluded hospitals (Zhongshan and Haining), we did not observe substantial differences compared with the main analyses ( appendix pp 21–22 ).
Compared with the USA, our study patients had a higher proportion of unknown stage cancers and substantially higher percentage of stages II–IV for breast cancer, lung cancer, and colorectal cancer ( figure 4 A). The largest early-diagnosis gap between China and the USA was for stage I female breast cancer (27·6% vs 51·2%), stage I colorectal cancer (15·2% vs 24·1%), and stage I lung cancer (17·3% vs 25·3%). However, stage I oesophageal cancer showed a more favourable disease stage distribution in China than in the USA (18·7% vs 13·8%; figure 4 B). Stage comparison for oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma alone also showed that the proportion of early-stage diagnosis in China was higher than in the USA ( appendix p 25 ).
After age standardisation, the USA consistently had a higher proportion of stage I cases of lung cancer, stomach cancer, colorectal cancer, and breast cancer than did China ( appendix p 24 ).

Section: Discussion

Our results showed that the prevalence of late-stage cancers at diagnosis remained more than 52·0% through 2016–17 in our Chinese patients. We uncovered large diagnostic disparities between rural and urban populations for lung cancer, stomach cancer, and breast cancer. An increased risk of late-stage disease at diagnosis was generally associated with men and boys compared with women and girls, and individuals with NCMS insurance compared with individuals with urban insurances. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive and up-to-date study with data from multicentre, hospital-based registries to systematically examine the distribution of stage for multiple cancer types in China. Our findings have important implications for cancer awareness, screening, and early detection programmes, and access to medical care.
Disparities in cancer stage at diagnosis by place of residence have been widely reported, whereas a small number of previous studies on diagnostic disparities were explored in some reports with a focus on a single cancer type in China. Similar to existing evidence, we observed that people living in rural areas tended to have a higher incidence of late-stage disease at diagnosis than those living in urban areas for lung, female breast, and stomach cancers. In China, urban residents generally have socioeconomic advantages in health care, including higher income and access to better medical resources than people in rural areas. Urban residents might also have better cancer awareness than those in rural areas, promoting them to pursue cancer screening and early detection programmes. Disparities in health insurance schemes between urban and rural areas could be another important explanation for the diagnostic gap. In China, the majority of urban insurance types provide more favourable benefits and a higher percentage of reimbursement than the NCMS insurance; therefore, urban residents are more likely to have access to screening services and see a doctor in a timely manner. Previous studies have shown that expanding Medicaid coverage in certain states of the USA was associated with cancer stage migration to a more favourable stage in patients with cancer who resided there. Therefore, a more consolidated social health insurance scheme in China, and improved medical facilities and cancer screening capacities in rural areas, could close the gap of urban and rural disparities on early diagnosis of cancer. We observed that there was no significant disparity in colorectal cancer stage between urban and rural areas in China, which was consistent with the existing evidence. This finding implies that geographical disparity is not simply related to remoteness, but most likely linked to a range of individual, health system, and disease-specific factors. Further research would be beneficial to ascertain to what extent differences in cancer screening, accessibility of health care, and disease-specific factors affect the urban–rural disparities on diagnosis of different cancer types.
Sex and age disparities in stage at diagnosis might reflect the differences in awareness and interpretation of cancer symptoms. There is consistent evidence to support the fact that patients with early-onset colorectal cancer had a higher risk of late-stage diagnosis. Although the underlying reasons are unclear, it is possible that early-onset colorectal cancer has different pathogenesis compared with late-onset colorectal cancer. Our findings suggest the need to discover a high-risk population for young-onset colorectal cancer. We found that patients who had a family history of cancer had a reduced probability of late-stage disease than those without cancers of the lung, stomach, oesophagus, and female breast, which was consistent with existing reports. Patients who have a family history of cancer might have a better awareness of cancer symptoms, and might be more likely to have routine health screening. Effects of smoking and drinking on cancers vary in different organ systems. Our results showed that smoking was associated with late stage at diagnosis for lung cancer. In contrast, drinking was associated with late stage at diagnosis for colorectal cancer and oesophageal cancer. Previous studies also observed similar findings. Further investigation is needed to identify whether smoking or drinking has any underlying biological basis for the progression of these cancers. These findings offer further evidence to support the importance of a healthy lifestyle in cancer prevention and control. In the updated Healthy China Action Plan (2019–30) on Cancer Control Campaign, the Chinese Government has emphasised the importance of strengthening cancer awareness and promoting healthy lifestyle, which would be beneficial for future cancer control and prevention in the country.
The stage at diagnosis is an important prognostic factor in explaining international differences in cancer survival. As a high-income country, the USA has had significant improvement in early detection of cancer and prognosis for some major cancers over the past few years. The publicly available high-quality SEER data further allow us to make comparisons between China and the USA. We observed that our study patients had a higher proportion of late-stage cancers of the lung, stomach, colorectum, and female breast compared with the USA. The largest early-diagnosis gap was seen for breast cancer and colorectal cancer between China and the USA. Differences in late stage at diagnosis might partly explain the survival differences from these cancers between China and the USA. The high screening rates for female breast cancer and colorectal cancer in the USA might contribute to the early diagnosis and reduced mortality of these diseases. The more favourable stage distribution for oesophageal cancer in China than in the USA might also be a potential cause in explaining survival advantages for the Chinese patients with oesophageal cancer compared with the USA. Meanwhile, there was a higher proportion of late-stage diagnoses of these common cancers in China than in Japan and South Korea, particularly for oesophagus and stomach cancers, where endoscopic screening has been widely implemented. The Chinese Government has expanded the cancer screening and early detection network to 31 provinces. However, the proportion of the population covered by the government's screening programmes was less than 1%. Therefore, the screening effect on stage migration remains to be seen. Our results enforce the necessity for screening and early detection of these cancers among the Chinese population and targeted interventions to improve timely access to cancer care.
Our study has several limitations. First, this study is observational and future prospective studies are needed to explore whether the association between selected covariates and stage at diagnosis is a causal link. Second, our dataset is hospital-based, and cannot fully represent the whole population in China. Even though our multicentre, hospital-based design took into consideration geographical variation, population density, socioeconomic status, and lifestyles in the country, the patients included in our study were mostly located in areas with better socioeconomic development than average. Therefore, the true proportion of early stage at diagnosis in Chinese patients with cancer could be lower than our pooled results. Future studies are needed, with the use of a nationally representative sample. Third, temporal trends for stage at diagnosis in China might be more informative, which could reflect potential achievement in cancer screening and basic medical facilities. We did not collect detailed screening information at an individual level; therefore, we were unable to precisely evaluate the screening effect on stage migration ( appendix pp 13–14 ). Given that continuous surveillance of stage at diagnosis is an ongoing effort in these areas, our study results will serve as a foundation for future studies. Fourth, although we established a standardised study protocol for stage abstracting and did a series of training programmes to ensure data quality, the stage information was retrieved from many hospitals, and potential non-differential misclassification could not be ruled out.
Missing data on cancer stage information is a common problem in cancer registries. The proportion of completeness for stage at diagnosis in Chinese patients with cancer is still lower than in the USA. More extensive efforts are needed to improve the completeness of stage information, which are essential to access control policy and to understand inequalities in cancer management. We collected patients’ detailed sociodemographic, diagnostic, and lifestyle information, which allowed us to adjust for potential confounding factors and fully examine the stage distribution across different populations and cancer types combined with other characteristics for the first time in the Chinese population.
In summary, the study results contribute to understanding of cancer diagnostic disparities in China and highlight an urgent need for improving cancer awareness and early detection of cancer in the country. Future population-based studies are necessary to discover the underlying reasons for diagnostic disparities among different populations in China and provide scientific evidence for intervention to narrow these disparities.

Section: Data sharing

The study group welcomes potential collaboration to maximise the use of data. A data dictionary, a detailed study protocol, and the R programmes can be reached by contacting the corresponding author of this paper. Due to Chinese legal restrictions and the current ethical approval for the study, data are not publicly available to share, but the research group can provide descriptive data in table form. Requests can be made to HZ.

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

We want to thank the health workers of 25 hospitals who provided detailed cancer data. We especially appreciated the contributions of the following collaborators: Guoshuang Feng (Big Data Center, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China); Qingsheng Wang (Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China); Jijun Duan (Wuhan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hubei, China); Xibin Sun (Henan Cancer Research and Control Office, Henan Cancer Hospital, Henan, China); Min Zhang (Hubei Cancer Hospital/Hubei Cancer Registry, Hubei, China); Guangcan Li (Hubei Cancer Hospital/Hubei Cancer Registry, Hubei, China); Lingbin Du (Cancer Hospital of University of Chinese Academy of Sciences/Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute of Cancer Research and Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhejiang, China); Huixin Sun (Institute of Cancer Prevention and Treatment, Harbin Medical University, Heilongjiang, China); Tingting Zuo (Cancer Hospital of China Medical University/Liaoning Cancer Hospital & Institute, Liaoning, China); Zhaolai Hua (Yangzhong Institute for Cancer Prevention and Control/People's Hospital of Yangzhong City, Jiangsu, China); Xiaoping Gu (Dafeng Cancer Registry, Dafeng Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Jiangsu, China); Jinwan Qiao (Fifth People's Hospitals of Qinghai Province, Qinghai, China); Meijun Yue (Luoshan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Henan, China). We acknowledge the funding support from the National Key R&D Programme of China (2016YFC1302502, 2018YFC1312105, 2016YFC1302505), Major State Basic Innovation Programme of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (2018-I2M-3-003), and National Natural Science Fund (81672819).
Editorial note: the Lancet Group takes a neutral position with respect to territorial claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (978.73 KB) Supplementary appendix
