Title: Inequalities in early childhood body-mass index Z scores in Victoria, Australia: a 15-year observational study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Early childhood overweight and obesity increased substantially in high-income countries throughout the 1980s and 1990s. The flattening or reversal of this trend since the early 2000s might conceal widening inequalities. This study aimed to identify trends in body-mass index Z score (BMIz) among children aged 1–3·5 years in Victoria (Australia), by socioeconomic status and geographical location.

Abstract_Section: Methods

This repeated, cross-sectional study used deidentified records of height, weight, and demographic information from electronic databases in the Victorian Maternal and Child Health system. Data from the consultations for children aged 1, 2, and 3·5 years were included in this analysis. We removed duplicate records; records with missing data for sex, age, weight, height, or postcode; and records with postcodes that were outside of Victoria. The coprimary outcomes were trends in mean BMIz (continuous linear models) and prevalence of high BMIz (>+1; generalised linear models), estimated for six independent age–sex groups. Secondary analysis was done for the prevalence of BMIz greater than 2. Effect modification by socioeconomic status and remoteness was evaluated.

Abstract_Section: Findings

Electronic data were available for 48 local government areas collected between Jan 1, 2003, and Dec 31, 2017, representing approximately 63% of the Victorian population. Overall, 1 329 520 measurements from 675 991 children were included in the analysis. There were small, significantly decreasing trends in mean BMIz across all six age–sex groups, overall and in major cities. Similar patterns were observed for some subgroups in prevalence of high BMIz. These decreasing trends appear to be partly explained by migration. Conversely, in regional areas the trends in BMIz were consistently increasing in all age–sex groups and across socioeconomic strata, although not all groups were statistically significant. Inequalities in BMIz according to socioeconomic status persisted throughout the study period, such that the children from more advantaged areas had lower mean BMIz.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

This study showed that at a state level, mean BMIz and prevalence of high BMIz decreased in children aged 1, 2, and 3·5 years in Victoria between 2003 and 2017. We found metropolitan–regional differences to be key source of inequality in early childhood BMIz trends, alongside area-level socioeconomic status. These findings highlight the risk that analysis of overall trends in childhood BMIz might obscure important inequalities according to, for example, remoteness, socioeconomic status, and ethnicity. Future research requires monitoring data with large population samples to adequately examine differences in prevalence and trends between population subgroups.

Abstract_Section: Funding

None.

Section: Introduction

Childhood overweight and obesity have increased in most high-income countries and many low-income and middle-income countries throughout the 1980s and 1990s. This increase includes a large rise in overweight and obesity prevalence in children younger than 5 years. Childhood overweight and obesity track into adulthood, meaning that trends during early childhood provide an indication of future disease burden.
Since the early 2000s several studies report flattening of childhood overweight and obesity trends and decreases in high-income countries. This pattern has been observed in children younger than 5 years in many countries, including New Zealand, Sweden, the UK, and Australia. Whether the observed decreases have continued and whether the changes are consistent across subpopulations of children remains unclear. Robust monitoring data representing large groups are needed to understand the timing and extent of emerging trends in overweight and obesity. Particular attention is needed to examine whether overall improvements have been accompanied by widening inequalities observed in some populations.
Victoria is the most densely populated state in Australia and the second largest by population. More than three-quarters (78%) of the Victorian population live in major cities, primarily the capital city, Melbourne; whereas, the remainder of the population is distributed among areas classified as inner regional (18%), outer regional (4%), and remote (<0·1%). A study of children aged 2–4 years indicated some reductions in prevalence of overweight and obesity between 1999 and 2007; however, less is known about whether these trends have been sustained or how they have affected socioeconomic, gender, and geographical inequalities.

Victoria has a track record of substantial investment in policies and programmes during the past two decades to promote healthy weight among children. These programmes have included numerous community-wide obesity prevention demonstration projects. The Romp & Chomp project (2004–08) focused on early childhood (5 years or younger), and was among the first to show effective prevention of obesity through community-level interventions for this age group. The lessons from these projects informed several state-level initiatives, including Kids–Go for Your Life, a setting-based health promotion initiative across Victoria. Comprehensive approaches to preventing unhealthy weight gain were brought together in the Healthy Together Victoria (HTV) initiative , established in 2011, which was implemented state-wide with additional focused investment for 12 communities. HTV aimed to address obesity and related chronic diseases using a wide range of strategies across settings and sectors, informed by a complex systems approach. Key ongoing initiatives emerging from HTV for young children include the Victorian Government Achievement Program for Healthy Early Childhood Services and the Healthy Eating Advisory Service (HEAS) . The HEAS supports early childhood settings to provide healthier menus and meet the relevant National Quality Standard for early childhood education and care services (introduced in 2012), which sets minimum quality standards for healthy food provision, and mandates promotion of nutrition, physical activity, and healthy lifestyles.
This study aimed to identify trends in body-mass index Z score (BMIz) among children aged 1–3·5 years in Victoria (Australia) by age, sex, socioeconomic status, and geographical location.

Section: Methods

This repeated, cross-sectional study used deidentified records of height, weight, and demographic information from databases in the Victorian Maternal and Child Health (MCH) system. MCH is a government funded, universal child health service, provided to all families in Victoria without charge at point of delivery and administered through local government. The MCH service offers ten key age and stage consultations, scheduled at specified ages from birth to 3·5 years. Data from the consultations for children aged 1, 2, and 3·5 years were included in this analysis. We removed duplicate records; records with missing data for sex, age, weight, height, or postcode; and records with postcodes that were outside of Victoria. Consultations are concentrated in the first months of life and become less frequent at older ages. At each consultation, along with other health checks, the child's height and weight are routinely measured and recorded by the nurse.
Electronic MCH data collection started in Victoria in 1999 with staggered implementation across local government areas. For this reason, our analysis included the 48 local government areas that had electronic data available between 2003 and 2017. State-wide attendance rates at MCH consultations typically range from 79% to 83% for the consultation at age 1 year, 68% to 73% at 2 years, and 63% to 66% at 3·5 years.
This study was approved by the Deakin University Human Research Ethics Committee Faculty of Health Ethics Advisory Group (approval HEAG-H 113_2014) and the Victorian State Government Department of Education and Training Research in Schools and Early Childhood settings process (approval 2014_002421).
Records of children's sex, date of birth, visit date, height, weight, mother's country of birth, home postcode, and local government area were extracted. Exact age was calculated from date of birth and date of measurement. Sex-specific BMI for age Z scores (BMIz) were calculated with WHO Child Growth Standards macro for stata. Records with biologically implausible values, a proxy for data errors, were removed according to WHO criteria (ie, BMIz <–5 or >+5, weight for age Z score < –6 or >+5, and length or height for age Z score <–6 or >+6).
The coprimary outcomes were mean BMIz (continuous) and prevalence of BMIz greater than 1. Secondary analysis was done for the prevalence of BMIz greater than 2.
Few children are measured at the precise age recommended for the consultation; most attend the consultation weeks or months after reaching the recommended age. Child observations were allocated to three scheduled key age and stage consultations according to non-overlapping categories on the basis of the child's exact age at measurement. For each scheduled consultation age (1, 2, or 3·5 years), we identified measurements that met the following criteria: 1 year key age and stage consultation group (aged 16 months or younger, but older than 10 months), 2 years key age and stage consultation group (aged 30 months or younger, but older than 22 months), and 3·5 years key age and stage consultation group (aged 48 months or younger, but older than 36 months). For each age group, the record with the age closest to the scheduled consultation age and with complete data was selected.
Area-level socioeconomic status was derived using the Australian Bureau of Statistics Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) Index of Relative Socio-economic Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD) and remoteness was derived from the Australian Bureau of Statistics Australian Statistical Geography Standard Remoteness Structure, both based on the child's home postcode. These measures are available for the national census years (2001, 2006, 2011, and 2016); the census year preceding the measurement date was used to classify postcodes.
The SEIFA provide summaries of socioeconomic status of an area's residents based on data collected in the census. In this study, the IRSAD was used as a proxy for child socioeconomic status because it includes measures of relative advantage and disadvantage and excludes remoteness and indigenous status (which is correlated with remoteness). The child's IRSAD percentile within the state-wide distribution was categorised by tertile.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics Australian Statistical Geography Standard Remoteness Structure divides the state of Victoria into areas classified as major cities, inner regional, outer regional, and remote on the basis of access to services ( appendix p 20 ). Outer regional and remote categories were combined (<0·1% of children lived in remote areas). Remoteness categories were further collapsed for effect modification analysis to a binary variable comprising major cities and regional or remote areas (inner regional, outer regional, and remote combined).
Trends from 2003 to 2017 were estimated independently for each gender and age (1, 2, and 3·5 years) group—ie, treating each age–sex group as a separate, repeated, cross-sectional analysis. Data for each age–sex group consisted of independent observations and each child contributed only one observation to each age group. This approach was selected in preference to considering longitudinal data because of the amount of missing data (only around a third of children had complete data at all three ages), and given that non-attendance at scheduled consultations is likely driven by numerous variables not available in the dataset, including child, family, and local health system characteristics.
BMIz trends were estimated with linear models and prevalence trends with generalised linear models (binary distribution and identity link). The outcome–time curve was modelled assuming a linear relationship and under a three-knot restricted cubic spline smoothing function to allow for potential non-linearity. We investigated whether secular trends varied across levels of remoteness and socioeconomic status of the child's area of residence by introducing interaction terms between time (or time spline variables) and a potential modifier one at a time or both modifiers simultaneously.
Because the linear component captured the general trends, we report slopes estimated under the most parsimonious model (linear assumption), which allowed comparison of trends across different levels of modifiers. The curves estimated under smoothing functions for BMIz ( appendix pp 12–14 ) and the summary of raw data by sex, age, calendar year (prevalence of BMIz >+1), remoteness, and socioeconomic status are shown in the appendix (pp 2–7) .
To explore potential associations with ethnicity, we repeated the primary analysis of trends in BMIz according to whether the child's mother was born in Australia or overseas. Mother's country of birth was not incorporated into primary analysis models because of high amounts of non-randomly distributed missing data. Data were cleaned with Stata SE (version 15.0) and analysed with SAS software (version 9.4). We used p<0·01 as the threshold for significance because of the large sample size.
There was no funding source for this study.

Section: Results

Electronic data collected between Jan 1, 2003, and Dec 31, 2017, were available for 48 local government areas, representing approximately 63% of the Victorian population. Overall, 1 329 520 measurements from 675 991 children were included in the analysis ( table 1 ). Slightly more than half (51·5%) were boys. There were more observations for children aged 1 year (n=559 800) than those aged 2 years (n=433 514) or 3·5 years (n=336 206), consistent with higher participation rates in the key age and stage consultations at younger ages, and children from high socioeconomic status areas were over-represented compared with the state-wide distribution.
There were small, but statistically significant, and consistently decreasing trends in BMIz across all six age–sex groups ( figure 1 ; table 2 ). The same general decreasing pattern was seen in the prevalence of high BMIz across all age groups (proportion of children with BMIz >+1 and BMIz >+2; figure 1 ; table 3 ; appendix p 8 ).
BMIz trends decreased for all socioeconomic status tertile levels across all six age–sex groups ( table 2 ; appendix p 15 ), although not all reductions were statistically significant. There were few significant differences in trends between socioeconomic status tertiles within age–sex groups ( table 2 ; appendix p 9 ), and the point estimates for the decreasing trends were largest in the high socioeconomic status (most advantaged) tertile in all cases. There were consistent differences in the intercepts by socioeconomic status tertile, such that the children from more advantaged areas had lower mean BMIz ( appendix p 15 ). Similar trends were observed for the prevalence of high BMIz; however, for both boys and girls aged 2 years, these reductions were statistically insignificant ( table 3 ; appendix p 10 ).
Analysis by remoteness showed that across all six age–sex groups, children living in major cities had significantly decreasing mean BMIz and prevalence of BMIz of more than 1 ( figure 2 ; table 2 –3). The estimated mean BMIz increased in inner regional areas and outer regional or remote areas for all six age–sex strata, although not all groups were statistically significant. Across all six age–sex strata, trends in BMIz were significantly different between children living in major cities and children in inner regional areas and outer regional or remote areas. There were no significant differences in trends between children living in inner regional areas and those in outer regional or remote areas (data not shown). Similar patterns were observed for prevalence of high BMIz ( table 3 ).
When socioeconomic status was analysed within the level of remoteness, the results showed that among children living in major cities, the mean BMIz significantly declined across all three levels of socioeconomic status in all six age–sex strata ( table 2 ; figure 3 ). Within regional and remote areas, the mean BMIz trends increased for all but one of the 18 subgroups defined by age, sex, and socioeconomic status, although differences were significant only in seven of the subgroups. This analysis also showed that within remoteness, age, and sex strata, there were few differences in BMIz trends across socioeconomic status despite clear cross-sectional differences. By contrast, there were consistent and significant differences in mean BMIz trends between children living in major cities and those in regional areas within every socioeconomic status level ( table 2 ; figure 3 ; appendix p 9 ), meaning that, when socioeconomic status tertile remains constant, the reductions are significantly less favourable in regional areas compared with major cities across all six strata. Similar patterns were observed for prevalence of high BMIz ( table 3 ; appendix p 10 ).
The proportion of children with mothers born overseas increased throughout the study period, primarily in major cities (example for children aged 1 year shown in the appendix p 16 ). When BMIz trends were examined according to mother's country of birth (born in Australia or overseas), the overall decreasing trends in mean BMIz were only apparent among children with mothers born overseas ( appendix p 17 ). In an analysis of the subset of children with mothers born in Australia, the overall trends across age–sex groups were mixed ( appendix p 11 ), with three of the six groups showing no change over time, a decreasing trend in boys aged 1 year, and an increasing trend in boys and girls aged 2 years. However, the differences in trends by remoteness persisted in this subset of children with generally increasing trends observed in regional areas in all age–sex groups, most of which were significantly higher than the unchanged trends over time in major cities for this subset of children ( appendix pp 11, 18, 19 ).

Section: Discussion

By use of repeated, cross-sectional analyses of children aged 1, 2, and 3·5 years in Victoria, this study showed that at a state level, mean BMIz and prevalence of high BMIz decreased between 2003 and 2017. These findings are similar to the trends observed internationally.
The decreasing trends observed overall and in major cities could be explained by the changing demographic profile of families over time, specifically, an overall increase in the proportion of mothers born overseas, which occurred primarily in city areas. In the past 10 years, an increasing proportion of mothers who have young children in Victoria were born overseas in countries that have a lower population average BMI. At the 2016 census, the largest cohort of mothers born overseas and living in Victoria were from England, India, and China. This demographic shift has implications for the interpretation of observed secular trends in weight status. Among international studies that have identified decreasing trends in childhood overweight and obesity in high-income countries, few have included analysis of ethnicity. Understanding the role that migration patterns and ethnicity play in overall population trends is exceptionally complex because trends are likely to differ between groups, the proportion of the population from each group might vary over time, and because of interactions with other socioeconomic factor.
No clear reductions were found in socioeconomic inequalities among children with overweight and obesity, with some evidence of a widening of these socioeconomic status disparities. Among children aged 1 year and 3·5 years, disparities were maintained as the trends in BMIz moved in parallel across all socioeconomic status levels. This finding is noteworthy because widening disparities have frequently been observed in other countries that have documented improvements in early childhood weight status.
A substantial inequality has emerged over this study period between children living in major cities and those in regional areas, among whom there were small increases in weight-related outcomes consistent across all six age–sex groups. This finding was robust to the outcome measure and to stratification by socioeconomic status and mother's country of birth (Australia or overseas). This inequality has not previously been documented in Australian children aged 1–3·5 years, and the diverging time trends have not previously been shown. A similar trend was observed among schoolchildren (5–12 years) in New South Wales, Australia, showing a significant increase in overweight and obesity between 2010 and 2015 by 4 percentage points among children in rural areas, compared with a non-significant decrease of 1·5 percentage points in urban areas. Similarly, in a large study of children aged 4 years in New Zealand, there were significant improvements in overweight and obesity among children living in urban areas compared with no change in rural areas.
The differences between metropolitan and rural and regional environments might be an important element in understanding obesity transitions across populations. Populations outside of major cities might have a rise in overweight and obesity prevalence that lags behind the trends seen in metropolitan areas. Our study shows that the prevalence of overweight has continued to rise in young children from rural and regional populations. Globally, analysis of adult obesity data has shown a persistently higher prevalence in rural areas than in metropolitan areas of high-income countries, whereas in low-income and middle-income countries, the faster increases in prevalence among rural populations than in cities explain a large proportion of the overall rises in prevalence.
Research is scarce on how health care and social, environmental, and economic conditions relevant to early childhood weight vary according to remoteness in Australia. Remoteness represents a distinct form of disadvantage independent of, or in addition to, socioeconomic status disadvantage, and a wide range of health inequalities between metropolitan and regional or rural adults in Australia have been documented, including in obesity and cardiovascular disease. A greater proportion of the population in regional and remote areas of Australia are Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander People, who experience a substantial socioeconomic and political disadvantage and generally have poorer health outcomes than people in the general population. In our study, less than 1% of children were identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander People; these children make up 0·6% of the major city population and 3·4% of the outer regional remote population. Many complex and interacting environmental and social factors that might contribute to health outcomes differ by remoteness in Australia. These include accessibility of healthy food, health care, physical activity infrastructure and facilities, and access to and use of early childhood care and education services. However, there is little to suggest that the differences by remoteness in these factors have diverged further during the study period.
Separate examination of standardised scores for weight and height or length for age (data not shown) indicated that the observed trends over time in BMIz have been accompanied by decreases in weight for age and height or length for age at differential rates. What could have driven these patterns remains unclear, and no data are available in this study that would provide further insights. This issue warrants further investigation and might explain the mechanisms driving divergent population trends in BMIz, including shifts in the demographic composition of the population over time or changes in child and maternal nutrition.
The large population sample analysed represents a substantial proportion of all children born in Victoria, which was a strength of this study. Data availability was determined by area-level administrative factors (because of timing of the specific electronic database system uptake) and unrelated to the data being examined. The height and weight measures were routinely collected by trained MCH nurses with qualifications in midwifery and child and family health. The size and quality of this comprehensive dataset allowed us for the first time, to our knowledge, to examine trends in smaller Victorian population groups, such as those living in regional areas, with sufficient power to identify small but consistent trends.
Although participation rates in MCH consultations were high, one limitation was that our sample contained an over-representation of children from higher socioeconomic status areas relative to the state-wide distribution. This imbalance might reflect characteristics of the local government areas with available data, and that children from higher socioeconomic status families were more likely to attend scheduled check-ups. This factor should be considered when interpreting point estimates of prevalence or mean BMIz; however, the sample size enabled examination of trends within socioeconomic status tertiles stratified by age, sex, and remoteness, which showed that the observed trends were generally consistent across socioeconomic status levels.
There are also limitations in measures available in the dataset for effect modifiers. The measure of socioeconomic status used in this study represents average socioeconomic characteristics of an area (based on home postcode) and is a proxy for family socioeconomic status. The various components of socioeconomic status that contribute to health and wellbeing include factors such as education, health literacy, neighbourhood environments, and family financial resources. Such differences would be better captured with family-level measures of socioeconomic status. Mother's country of birth is a crude indicator but has been used as a proxy for child ethnicity, which might represent a range of genetic and sociocultural influences on maternal and child health and growth. Furthermore, there are limitations in the use of this variable in this dataset because of the high rate of missing data, which appears to be non-random.
Finally, although height and weight measurements are routine practice for nurses who collected these data, measurements are only taken once at each visit and human errors in measurements and recording are possible, although these are unlikely to systematically influence trends or the interpretation of results.
This study raises important policy-relevant questions about the environments influencing early childhood weight and whether the observed metropolitan–rural differences occur elsewhere. In Australia, average socioeconomic status is lower outside of major cities. However, the difference between major cities and regional areas observed in this study, appears not to be merely a function of general socioeconomic disadvantage, but rather a distinct additional form of disadvantage and health inequality.
Further research is needed to understand why remoteness appears to be a strong driver of increasing BMIz in young children during the study period. The inequality in trends between children living in regional and remote areas and those in metropolitan areas was consistent across age, sex, and socioeconomic status; and persisted even when restricted to children of Australian born mothers. Previous obesity prevention efforts have focused on areas of socioeconomic disadvantage, with good justification, given the persistent inequalities in weight status between children within high and low socioeconomic status. Our analysis suggests that the differences between major cities and regional areas might be stronger drivers of inequalities than socioeconomic status alone, supporting the case for substantial investment in research, policy, and programmes to improve health outcomes outside major cities.
More international evidence, from countries with varying socioeconomic status and demographic characteristics within the non-metropolitan population, would contribute to our understanding of potential mechanisms for the observed results and to the generalisability of our findings to other contexts. Amid an emerging international evidence base that suggests a so-called flattening of trends in overweight and obesity, our results suggest a need to consider a range of potentially widening inequalities, including rurality, ethnicity, and other components of socioeconomic status.
Future research should include strong evaluation of natural experiments and existing large-scale intervention programmes, and the ways they might have affected early childhood environments. This evaluation will require Australia-wide data, detailed geographical analyses to identify areas with differing trajectories, and strong connections with local and state decision makers to ensure that this evidence can inform timely policy and programme responses. Future work should also seek to understand the variation in longitudinal (within each child) growth trajectories across socioeconomic and remoteness areas in Victoria, and the extent to which these have changed over time. A nationally standardised system for collecting and reporting routine early childhood health data would allow Australia to identify and respond to population shifts and inequalities in early childhood weight status in a timely and tailored way.

Section: Data sharing

Individual-level data cannot be made available by the authors. Researchers can apply for data access for approved research purposes directly from the Victorian state Government. Analytics codes are available on request from the corresponding author.

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

We thank the Victorian Government Department of Education in Training for the support and the Municipal Association of Victoria for facilitating access to the dataset. We also thank Denise Becker (Deakin University Faculty of Health Biostatistics Unit) for her assistance in preparing the manuscript.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (1.48 MB) Supplementary appendix
