Title: Lifecourse socioeconomic position and cohort differences in health expectancy in Australia: a longitudinal cohort study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

There is a need to know how changes in health expectancy differ for population subgroups globally. The aim of this study was to estimate 10-year trends in health expectancies by individual markers of socioeconomic position from three points over the lifecourse, evaluating how compression and expansion of morbidity have varied within a national population.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We analysed data from two cohorts of the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia survey. The cohorts were followed annually from 2001 to 2007 (n=4720; baseline age range 50–100 years) and 2011 to 2017 (n=6632; baseline age range 50–99 years). Health expectancies were estimated at age 65 years for four outcomes reflecting activity limitations, disability, perceived health, and mental health. Cohort differences were compared by gender, age left school, occupational prestige, and housing tenure.

Abstract_Section: Findings

Women with low socioeconomic position were the only group with no improvements in life expectancy across the two cohorts. Among men with low education and all women gains in life expectancy comprised entirely of years lived with global activity limitations. Compression of years lived with severe-disability, poor self-rated health, and poor mental health was most consistently observed for men and women with high education and home ownership. Occupational prestige did not greatly differentiate cohort differences in health expectancies.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

Over the past two decades in Australia, social disparities in health expectancies have at least been maintained, and have increased for some outcomes. Equitable gains in health expectancies should be a major public health goal, and will help support sustainable health and social care systems.

Abstract_Section: Funding

Australian Research Council.

Section: Introduction

Whether greater human longevity is associated with more or fewer years of healthy independent living is an enduring and fundamental question for understanding the health of ageing populations. Summary measures of health expectancy provide a basis for answering such questions, because they combine information on morbidity or disability with mortality data to quantify the years of remaining life that adults at a given age can expect to live in good health. Cohort differences in health expectancies (also referred to as trends in health expectancies) can therefore be used to evaluate the extent to which rising life expectancies have been accompanied by a commensurate decrease or increase in the years lived with disability and loss of independence. These two contrasting scenarios are known as compression of morbidity and expansion of morbidity, both expressed in either absolute or relative terms . Absolute compression or expansion is defined by change in the years lived in good or poor health, whereas relative compression or expansion is defined by change in the proportion of overall life expectancy lived in good or poor health. A third intermediary scenario, referred to as dynamic equilibrium, is also possible and defined by either an increase in years of good and poor health, or an increase in poor health, but with only mild levels of disability.
Evidence is equivocal on compression and expansion of morbidity, with patterns depending on definition of health, the analytic method, and the reference population. Internationally, expansion of chronic disease, but compression of disability, has been observed within high-income countries. Similarly, national estimates of disability-free life expectancy (DFLE) in Australia show no single scenario to have occurred over recent decades. Although there is substantial evidence informing geographical and cross-national DFLE comparisons, there is little information on how trends in health expectancies vary within national populations. One reason for this is the predominance of repeated cross-sectional designs based on Sullivan's method, which limits disaggregation of expectancies to data available in national lifetables. In most countries, national lifetables are stratified by gender, but not for other important population groups, making it difficult to examine whether social disparities in healthy life expectancy have widened, remained stable, or reduced with time.
It is likely that a mix of compression–expansion dynamics occur within populations and follow a social gradient. Australian and UK research has shown how trends in DFLE differ by area-level characteristics reflecting deprivation and social disadvantage. Notably, both studies found improvements in DFLE were greater in areas characterised by high socioeconomic position. These two studies defined socioeconomic position with ecological indicators that aggregate sociodemographic characteristics at the community level, but do not account for the particular socioeconomic resources directly available to individuals. The socioeconomic profile of small localities can change over time, and so might not always accurately capture the life experiences and accumulated resources of households of older individuals. Likewise, changing social norms and diverging life pathways might mean links between specific socioeconomic exposures with health outcomes differ across cohorts and life stage. It has long been recognised that adopting a lifecourse perspective is critical for understanding determinants of healthy ageing processes. It is therefore important to supplement research on area-level disparities in health expectancy trends with evidence relating to individual markers of socioeconomic position from different points in the lifecourse. Numerous studies have demonstrated disparities in health expectancies by individual markers of socioeconomic position, including education, occupation, and housing tenure. These comparisons are primarily available in European and US populations and have rarely been made across birth cohorts to evaluate trends over time.

The aim of this study was to evaluate how compression and expansion of morbidity dynamics have transpired within different population subgroups in Australia since 2001. We compare cohort differences in health expectancies by lifecourse markers of socioeconomic position. Specifically, health expectancies are estimated for four outcomes: limiting long-term health conditions, difficulties with activities of daily living (ADLs), self-rated health (SRH), and mental health. We choose to investigate multiple outcomes in keeping with contemporary models of healthy ageing that advocate for multidimensional characterisations of health and emphasise the importance of wellbeing and functioning. There have been few studies examining mental health expectancies since the early 2000s, while the other domains are common health expectancy outcomes and help inform international comparisons. We examine the extent to which cohort differences in health expectancies vary by three markers of socioeconomic position from early life, mid life, and late life. Our primary focus is on educational attainment, because this is one of the most commonly examined socioeconomic indicators in health expectancy research. The age at which an individual left school is not only a good indicator of education level, but is also a proxy for early life circumstances that is stable over the lifespan, and an important knowledge-based resource for future life opportunities, making it a potent determinant of late-life outcomes that is not subject to reverse causality. In addition, we include a measure of occupation as a prestige-based marker of socioeconomic position during working life. Finally, we consider home ownership, because it provides a major source of financial security for older Australians and is increasingly recognised as a social determinant of health in later life.

Section: Methods

Data were drawn from the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey, a nationally representative household panel survey that commenced in 2001, and is ongoing with annual follow-up. Households were selected via a multistage sampling design and all household residents aged 15 years and older were invited to participate. At baseline, the sample comprised 7682 households (66% response rate) and 13 969 individuals aged 15 years and older. A sample top-up occurred in 2011, to account for changes in population structure over time. The 2011 top-up included a further 2153 households consisting of 4009 individuals, resulting in 9543 households and 17 612 individuals overall. From 2002 to 2017, the response rate has remained greater than 85%. Mortality data were obtained from the National Death Index in 2014, and from family records in all years up until 2017. Further details on the HILDA survey method are provided in the appendix (pp 3–4) and in publicly available reports.
The Human Ethics Advisory Committee at The University of Melbourne granted ethical approval for HILDA (ID number 1647030).
For the current study we defined two birth cohorts: the 2001 and 2011 cohorts, each aged 50 years or older at baseline. The older (2001) cohort included 4721 individuals (2477 [52%] women and 2244 [48%] men) born in or before 1950, who commenced the survey in 2001 and were followed up to 2007. The younger (2011) cohort included 6632 individuals (3552 [54%] women and 3080 [46%] men) born in or before 1960, and followed up from 2011 to 2017. Thus, each cohort provided up to seven waves of data, with baseline waves occurring in 2001 and 2011, respectively. There were 2795 respondents contributing data to both cohorts. Flowcharts depicting sample selection are provided in the appendix (pp 8–9) .
A Global Activity Limitation Indicator (GALI) was assessed at each wave via personal interview, with the question, “Do you have any long-term health condition, impairment or disability that restricts you in your everyday activities, and has lasted or is likely to last, for 6 months or more?”, with yes or no response categories.
Difficulty with ADLs was assessed by the Physical Function (PF) subscale of the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) as part of a self-completion questionnaire. Items include mobility limitations relating to walking, climbing stairs, carrying or lifting groceries, dressing, and bathing. Consistent with previous Australian research, a threshold of SF-36 PF scores of 40 or lower indicated disability. This is a more severe threshold for disability than the GALI.
SRH was assessed using the question, “In general, would you say that your health is excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor?”. Respondents who reported their health to be either fair or poor were identified with low self-reported health.
Mood and anxiety symptoms experienced over the previous 4 weeks were assessed using the five-item Mental Health Inventory (MHI-5) from the SF-36, which has been validated as a screen for mood disorders. A threshold of SF-36 MHI-5 scores of 50 or lower indicate poor mental health.
Respondents who reported leaving school before the age of 14 years were classified as having low education. This corresponds with the minimum school leaving age for all Australian jurisdictions up until the early 1960s.
Occupation was coded according to the Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations. Tertiles reflecting low, mid, and high occupational prestige were then derived from the Australian Socioeconomic Index 2006.
Housing tenure was coded as a binary variable distinguishing people who live in their own home or rent-free, from people living in the private rental market.
The expected number of years lived with and without each outcome were estimated by age left school, occupational prestige, and housing tenure. We estimated health expectancies with Interpolated Markov Chain (IMaCh) software version 0.99r19. IMaCh uses a multistate Markov model for discrete time data to estimate transitions between health and disability states and mortality ( appendix pp 11–12 ), and calculates the average number of years lived in each particular health or disability state. Observed time intervals were partitioned into 1-month intervals to approximate an underlying continuous process. 1-month transition probabilities conditioned on age and marker of socioeconomic position were estimated via multinomial logistic regression and then used as inputs to generate a multistate life table for each subgroup. Separate analyses were performed by sex, cohort, and outcome. Trends in Total Life Expectancy (TLE), DFLE (or Healthy Life Expectancy [HLE]), and Disability Life Expectancy (DLE) were calculated by the difference in estimates between the two cohorts. Sample weights were included to reflect the characteristics of the national Australian population for each cohort.
Sensitivity analyses assessing the robustness of our findings are described in the appendix (pp 11–13) . Briefly, we used an alternative approach to estimate health expectancies, whereby continuous-time multistate models were fit with the msm package in R version 4.1.0, and health expectancies then generated using elect. Second, we re-ran our original analyses in IMaCh, but with missing data imputed by random forest. Finally, we re-ran our analyses, using only data obtained before 2015.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, interpretation, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Section: Results

Baseline characteristics are provided in the appendix (pp 5–7) . The 4720 respondents in the 2001 cohort had an average baseline age of 67 years (SD 9·6); of these respondents, 4134 (88%) provided follow-up data on at least one occasion (31 323 observations overall). In the 2001 cohort, 144 (3%) respondents had low socioeconomic position for all three markers, and 235 (16%) of those with low education did not own their own home, compared with 399 (12%) of those with high education. The 6632 respondents in the 2011 cohort (47 120 observations overall) had an average baseline age of 68 years (SD 9·9); of these respondents, 6167 (93%) provided follow-up data on at least one occasion. In the 2011 cohort, 153 (2%) respondents had low socioeconomic position for all three markers, and 243 (21%) of those with low education did not own their own home, compared with 836 (15%) of those with high education ( appendix p 10 ).
Cohort differences for each health expectancy indicator at age 65 years are depicted in figures 1–4 and the appendix (pp 15–27) . Slight discrepancies in TLE across outcomes arise due to the differing number of observations contributing to each model. Interpretation of whether cohort differences indicate expansion of morbidity, compression of morbidity, or equilibrium, are provided in the table .
The cohort differences in GALI-related DFLE at age 65 years are presented in figure 1 . For men with low education there were similar DFLEs, reflecting years lived without activity limitations (cohort difference 0·1 years, 95% CI –0·9 to 1·2), in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort ( figure 1 ); point estimates indicate longer DLE, but the CIs include negative values (cohort difference 1·1 years, –0·5 to 2·8). The corresponding cohort differences for men with high education were 1·3 years of DFLE (0·4 to 2·2) and 2·2 years of DLE (0·8 to 3·5). Similar cohort differences were estimated by housing tenure and occupational prestige.
For women, low education was associated with shorter DFLE (cohort difference –1·2 years, 95% CI –2·2 to –0·1), but longer DLE (cohort difference 2·0 years, 0·0 to 4·0) in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort. In contrast, women with high education had almost the same DFLE (cohort difference –0·2 years, –1·1 to 0·8), but substantially longer DLE (cohort difference 2·9 years, 1·2 to 4·6) in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort. Women with low occupational prestige had shorter DFLE in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort (cohort difference –2·5, –3·4 to –1·5). There were no reliable cohort differences in expectancies for women who did not own their own home, although CIs were wide for this group (eg, TLE cohort difference –1·9, –5·4 to 1·5).
The cohort differences in ADL DFLE at age 65 years are presented in figure 2 . Men with low education had an additional 1·7 years (95% CI –0·4 to 3·7) of TLE in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort, which included roughly equivalent years of ADL DFLE (cohort difference 0·6 years, –1·1 to 2·3), and DLE (cohort difference 1·0, –0·2 to 2·3); although for all expectancies the CIs cross zero. Conversely, men with high education had longer DFLE (cohort difference 4·1 years, 2·5 to 5·7), but similar DLE (cohort difference 0·2 years, –0·8 to 1·1) in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort. Cohort differences in years lived with and without ADL disability did not vary by occupational prestige or housing tenure; with DFLE and TLE being higher in the 2011 cohort compared to 2001 across all groups, and DLE showing no cohort difference.
Across the two cohorts, women with low education had similar ADL DFLE (cohort difference 0·4 years, 95% CI –1·2 to 2·0) and DLE (cohort difference –0·4 years, –2·2 to 1·5). In contrast, women with high education had longer DFLE (cohort difference 2·2 years, 0·7 to 3·7) and slightly longer DLE (cohort difference 0·6 years, –0·9 to 2·0) in the 2011 cohort compared towith the 2001 cohort, although the difference was small. The pattern of results for women by housing tenure and occupational prestige tertile was highly comparable to that for education, although CIs were wide for high occupational prestige and renting.
Cohort differences in HLE defined by SRH at age 65 years are presented in figure 3 . There were roughly equivalent cohort differences in years lived with good SRH (1·0 years, 95% CI –0·6 to 2·7) and poor SRH (1·2 years, –0·2 to 2·7) for men with low education. By contrast, for men with high education, gains in life expectancy were predominately years lived in good SRH (cohort difference 3·1 years, 1·6 to 4·6) as opposed to years in poor SRH (cohort difference 0·7 years, 95% CI –0·3 to 1·8). Cohort differences in years lived with and without poor SRH did not vary by occupational prestige or housing tenure. There were no cohort differences in TLE or years lived with or without poor SRH for women with low education. However, women with high education had longer years lived with good SRH (cohort difference 2·9 years, 1·3 to 4·5) in the 2011 cohort compared with the 2001 cohort. CIs were wide for women with high occupational prestige and women who were renting.
The cohort differences in mental health expectancies at age 65 years are presented in figure 4 . There were roughly equivalent cohort differences in years lived with good mental health (1·1 years, 95% CI –0·9 to 3·4) and poor mental health (0·8 years, 0·2 to 1·4) for men with low education. The corresponding estimates for men with high education were 4·2 years (2·4 to 5·9) for good mental health and 0·0 years (–0·3 to 0·4) for poor mental health. As with ADL and SRH outcomes, men's mental health expectancies were not greatly differentiated by housing tenure or occupational prestige. There was evidence of increased years with good mental health across all occupation and housing groups between 2011 and 2001.
Women with a low level of education in the 2011 cohort had similar years of good mental health (cohort difference –0·2 years, 95% CI –2·4 to 2·0) and poor mental health (cohort difference 0·2 years, –0·4 to 0·9) compared with the 2001 cohort. The corresponding estimates for women with high education were 2·6 years (0·6 to 4·5) for good mental health and 0·1 years (–0·3 to 0·4) for poor mental health. Similar results were obtained for occupational prestige and housing tenure, with the exception of women with high occupational prestige, for whom there was a slight increase in years lived with poor mental health (cohort difference 0·6 years, 0·2 to 1·0).
For each cohort, expectancies at age 65 years and by age are given in the appendix (pp 16–23, 24–27) . These data show for all outcomes, longer DLE and shorter DFLE were consistently associated with lower education, lower occupational prestige, and renting. In addition, for both cohorts, women lived with more years with activity limitations (ie, longer GALI-related DLE), ADL disability, and poor SRH than men. There were no gender differences in mental health expectancies. In relative terms, there were no gender differences in the proportion of TLE lived with activity limitations in the 2001 cohort, whereas women lived for a greater proportion of TLE with activity limitations compared to men in the 2011 cohort.
Results from sensitivity analyses are presented in the appendix (pp 28–47 ; also available online ). Estimates derived from continuous time multi-state models are very similar to those presented here ( appendix pp 28–32 ). However, estimates from imputed data showed fewer years lived free from ADL disability, fewer years lived with good SRH, and lower TLE for men with low occupation and men who did not own their own home compared to estimates from complete case analyses ( appendix pp 33–37 ).

Section: Discussion

In this study we sought to clarify the extent to which contemporary trends in health expectancies have varied within a national population by three markers of lifecourse socioeconomic position, allowing us to evaluate evidence for compression of morbidity in Australia. We provide estimates for four health domains, thereby aligning with multidimensional definitions of healthy ageing that prioritise functional ability and wellbeing over the presence or absence of disease. These data provide evidence of all expansion–compression scenarios ranging from compression of years lived with poor mental health for most groups, to absolute expansion of activity limitations for women. There were wide CIs for some trends (eg, people living in private rental, and women with high occupational prestige) making it difficult to draw definitive conclusions regarding widening social inequalities in health expectancy over time. Nevertheless, for all comparisons, any social disparities in the 2001 cohort were at least maintained in 2011, and compression–expansion patterns showed signs of some divergence when compared across resource-based markers of socioeconomic position (ie, age left school and home ownership). For example, absolute compression of years lived with ADL disability and perceived poor health was observed for men with high socioeconomic position, whereas a pattern more consistent with equilibrium was observed for men with low socioeconomic position. Notably, women with low socioeconomic position had no improvements in overall life expectancy or years lived without disability, and lost years lived free from limiting long-term health conditions. Men with high socioeconomic position were the only group consistently estimated to have gains in healthy life years for all four outcomes.
Previously, Australian and international trends in health expectancies were disaggregated for men and women, and for area-level indicators of community disadvantage, but rarely for other sociodemographic strata. One US study of health expectancy trends from 2000 to 2010 concluded that the education gap in HLE was increasing at a greater rate than the education gap in TLE. We found this only for years lived free from ADL disability among men. Although education is well recognised as a lifelong resource for healthy longevity, home ownership is an important late-life determinant of health. Our findings correspond to growing evidence highlighting the substantial disadvantage experienced by older Australian women who do not own their own home. Given there were relatively few respondents who had low socioeconomic position for all three factors, inequalities tied to home ownership are unlikely to simply reflect continuation of education disadvantage. Home ownership has historically provided a critical source of financial security for older Australians, and there is need for public policy to consider the growing number of lifetime renters among younger cohorts. Whereas education and housing tenure appeared to distinguish widening disparities in TLE and DFLE, the same could not be said for occupational prestige. Occupation was associated with differences in DFLE and DLE within each cohort, but did not differentiate trends over time, particularly among men. Analyses of multi-cohort data from England, Finland, France, and Sweden found stronger social gradients in DFLE by occupational position for women than for men, although data on cohort differences have not been reported.
Finally, our results show gains in life expectancy were predominantly, if not entirely, years of good mental health. This corresponds with the only other international data on mental health expectancy trends from Brazil and China. The consistency across these studies is notable owing to the different health systems and cultural contexts for these three countries. Gender differences in mental health expectancies were also small, supporting findings that the gender gap in mental health throughout adulthood is attenuated in later life. Together, these findings show ageing to be a time of good mental wellbeing, despite the increased occurrence of chronic illness and functional limitations.
Currently, governments in many high-income countries are encouraging longer working lives, and this is reflected by increases to the qualifying age for the age pension in Australia, and the state pension in the UK. The present findings highlight the long-term, and earlier, health limitations among sociodemographic groups who are more reliant on the age pension for their retirement income. Healthy working life expectancies at age 50 years have been shown to fall short of the state pension age in England, and the gap is largest for people with low education and those who live in deprived areas. Further research is needed to quantify how health expectancies inter-relate with work expectancies in other countries.
Our study has several limitations. Our outcome measures of health and disability were based on self-report rather than clinical diagnoses or objective measures of functional performance and might be subject to reporting bias. The cohort differences reported are slightly larger than those provided in national lifetables for Australia. Linkage between HILDA and the national death register has not occurred after 2014, and records of death were obtained by interviewers in the field after this time. Thus, there might be under-reporting of mortality data for the 2011 cohort from 2014 onwards, which could result in overestimation of life expectancies in the younger cohort and therefore contribute to inflated cohort differences in life expectancies. Additionally, the HILDA survey only interviews people residing in private dwellings, thereby excluding older adults in residential aged care and other institutional settings. Residents in sparsely populated remote areas are also excluded. These exclusions are likely to establish a healthier sample with longer life expectancy relative to the entire population. Although overall response rates were high across the two cohorts, and analyses were weighted, the 2001 cohort had slightly higher survey and item-level non-response compared with the 2011 cohort ( appendix pp 8–9, 11 ). We do not consider the educational attainment or occupational prestige of other household members, which might be particularly important for providing socioeconomic resources for older women in the 2001 cohort. Furthermore, our measure of occupational prestige does not directly reflect exposures to hazardous work conditions which might be more important for late life health and functioning. Finally, comparisons are only made for two cohorts. Ideally, health expectancy trends should be identified by comparisons over multiple timepoints. It is also unclear how these findings might apply to younger generations with different life experiences and social norms (eg, increasing rates of educational attainment, lower home ownership), and there is therefore a need to make projections for these future cohorts. Future research should continue to provide descriptive epidemiological updates of contemporary morbidity trends, including for other important population subgroups.
In the context of population ageing, the interplay between morbidity, disability, and mortality has major implications for public policy, including assumptions about the work capacity of older adults, and the need for social welfare and health-care systems to support people as they age. Neither compression nor expansion of morbidity are inevitable, and health expectancy trends cannot simply be attributed to intrinsic biological processes of ageing. These data reveal complex and diverging patterns underlying the overall population trends in health expectancy. Interventions intended to improve healthy life years need to address social determinants of health from an early age, and specifically support vulnerable groups in later life, such as older women who do not own their home.

Section: Data sharing

HILDA data is not publicly available but can be requested from the Australian Department of Social Services National Centre for Longitudinal Data at no cost ( https://dataverse.ada.edu.au/dataverse/ ). All data coding and analysis scripts for this study are available at https://osf.io/68tq5/ .

Section: Declaration of interests

The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

Section: Acknowledgments

This work was supported by an Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Project grant (DP190100459). KJA is funded by an ARC fellowship (FL190100011).

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (2.63 MB) Supplementary appendix
