Title: Hospitalisation patterns among children exposed to childhood adversity: a population-based cohort study of half a million children


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Children who are exposed to adversities might be more susceptible to disease development during childhood and in later life due to impaired physiological and mental development. To explore this hypothesis, we assessed hospitalisation patterns through childhood and into adult life among those exposed to different trajectories of adversities during childhood.

Abstract_Section: Methods

For this population-based cohort study, we used annually updated data from Danish nationwide registers covering more than half a million children (aged 0–15 years) born between 1994 and 2001. Children who were alive and resident in Denmark on their 16th birthday were included in the analysis. Cluster analysis was used to divide children into five distinct trajectories according to their experience of childhood adversities, including poverty and material deprivation, loss or threat of loss within the family, and aspects of family dynamics. To describe comprehensively the disease patterns experienced by these groups of children, we assessed the associations of each adversity trajectory with hospital admission patterns according to the entire spectrum of disease diagnoses in the International Classification of Diseases 10th edition, from birth to 24 years of age, using survival models.

Abstract_Section: Findings

508 168 children born between Jan 1, 1994, and Dec 31, 2001, were followed up until Dec 31, 2018, capturing more than 3·8 million hospital admissions from birth to early adulthood. Hospitalisation rates were consistently higher in all four adversity groups compared with the low adversity group. The high adversity group (14 577 children, 3%), who were exposed to adversities of deprivation, family loss, and negative family dynamics, had a markedly higher rate of hospitalisations across all ages. For example, we observed 243 additional hospital admissions per 1000 person-years (95% CI 238–248) in the high versus low adversity group for those aged 16–24 years. These associations were particularly strong for diagnoses related to injuries, unspecified symptoms, and factors influencing health service contacts (eg, health screening and observation). They also covered a considerable burden of respiratory and infectious diseases, congenital malformations, diseases of the nervous system (especially in early life), mental and behavioural diagnoses, and diagnoses related to pregnancy and childbirth in early adult life.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

The close linkage between childhood adversities and poor lifelong health outcomes highlights a need for public health and policy attention on improving the socioeconomic circumstances children are born into to prevent the early emergence of health inequalities.

Abstract_Section: Funding

None.

Section: Introduction

Addressing social inequalities in health is a major public health priority. Accumulation of social adversities during childhood profoundly impacts health throughout life, and an up to four times higher risk of premature mortality in early adulthood has previously been shown among children experiencing high levels of adversities during childhood. Although mortality is rare at a young age, these findings suggest a substantial burden of underlying morbidity, which needs to be documented and disentangled to guide future prevention within this area.
Childhood adversities include a broad range of factors, such as poverty, family dysfunction, parental divorce, and severe illness in the family. Even in a country like Denmark with a high level of social security, we find that almost one in ten children is exposed to more than three childhood adversities between early infancy and late adolescence, and that there is a strong social gradient in exposure to the accumulation of childhood adversities. Most previous studies have focused solely on one or two types of childhood adversities, but the biological stress response system and coping mechanisms are more likely to break down when confronted with multiple stressors over longer periods. More comprehensive measures of childhood adversity, including aspects of timing and accumulation, are therefore needed to identify entry points for intervention and inform public health policy.

Several studies have shown that individuals who experience multiple adverse childhood events are at higher risk of both health-harming behaviours (eg, smoking and substance use) and chronic conditions (eg, mental illness, heart disease, and respiratory disease). The existing literature is, however, limited by primarily relying on retrospective, self-reported information on adverse childhood events in surveys. Retrospective recall of adversities is a particular concern in this line of research, where people who are exposed to multiple childhood adversities might never be included in surveys (eg, due to premature death, institutionalisation, or non-participation). Few studies have addressed hospitalisation patterns related to adversity, and the life course patterns of hospitalisation among children exposed to adversity remain to be documented in detail.
Using objective data from nationwide electronic health registries covering the whole population of Denmark, we aim to document the hospitalisation patterns of children following different trajectories of childhood adversities. To describe these patterns comprehensively, we explore the entire spectrum of disease included in the International Classification of Diseases 10th edition (ICD-10) among 508 168 children. We specifically focus on different periods, including early childhood (0–2 years), later childhood (3–15 years), and early adult life (16–24 years) to assess different hospitalisation and disease patterns within these age groups.

Section: Methods

In this population-based cohort study, we used data from the DANish LIFE course (DANLIFE) cohort study, which is based on continuously updated information from the Danish nationwide registers. Access to Danish registers is granted by Statistics Denmark and the Danish Health Data Authorities in an anonymous and secure form. Every Danish citizen is given a unique personal identification number at birth, which permits exact individual-level linkage between national registries in Denmark. All children born in Denmark in 1980 or later have been included in the DANLIFE cohort. The most recent update of the cohort includes a total of 2 223 927 children born between 1980 and 2015 with follow-up until the end of 2018. To cover trajectories of entire childhoods (aged 0–15 years), we excluded 866 119 children born after 2001. For the current study, we further restricted our analyses to the period after the introduction of ICD-10 in 1994, as we observed differences in diagnostic patterns before and after the introduction. Thus, we excluded 817 743 children born before 1994. We also excluded 28 115 children who emigrated before their 16th birthday and 3782 children who died before their 16th birthday. More than two-thirds of these deaths (2698 [71%] of 3782) occurred in children aged younger than 1 year, and the majority of these (1998 [74%] of 2698) were neonatal (within the first 28 days of life). We therefore had a sample of 508 168 children for our study ( figure 1 ). Although we restricted our sample to these 508 168 children based on our a priori analytical plan, the vast majority of these restrictions were based on objective criteria such as age or time periods, and the results are, therefore, generalisable to all Danish children born between 1994 and 2001.
The DANLIFE study has been approved by the Danish Data Protection Agency through the joint notification of The Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences at the University of Copenhagen (record number 514–0641/21–3000). The Danish Data Protection Agency ensures compliance with national and EU legislation. Registry linkage studies do not require informed consent or ethical approval by the Danish National Committee on Health Research Ethics according to Danish law.
The linkage between child, parents, and siblings in the Danish registers enables the measurement of a range of childhood adversities, details of which have been published previously. The appendix (p 4) provides an overview of the 12 included childhood adversities. A panel of experts in stress, child health, and child psychology have previously decided on the three predefined dimensions of childhood adversity: material deprivation (ie, family poverty and parental long-term unemployment); loss or threat of loss within the family (ie, parental severe somatic illness, sibling severe somatic illness, and death of a parent or a sibling); and family dynamics (ie, maternal separation, being placed in foster care, parental psychiatric illness, sibling psychiatric illness, and parental alcohol or drug abuse). In accordance with previous work, we established the five most common trajectory groups across these three dimensions. This approach allowed us to incorporate the full range of information from the high-resolution longitudinal data from birth to 16 years of age. The small proportion of children who died (3782 [0·7%] of 540 065) or emigrated (28 115 [5%] of 540 065) before their 16th birthday could not be classified using this approach and were therefore excluded. We used the package TRAJ for Stata (version 14.2) to fit between 1 and 8 trajectory clusters using zero-inflated Poisson regressions with a quadratic trajectory function yielding a probability for each individual of being in each trajectory group, and we judged that five trajectory groups divided the individuals optimally. The appendix (pp 2–3 ) includes details about the analytical approach.
We used data from the Danish National Patient Registry. Reporting to this registry is mandatory for all Danish hospitals, and information is available on the type of encounter, admission and discharge dates, and diagnosis. The study population was followed up from birth until emigration, death, or end of follow-up on Dec 31, 2018. 2733 individuals who emigrated after the age of 16 years were censored at the date of emigration. Individuals were followed up for all events within each of the 21 ICD-10 chapters (except chapter 20, which is not used to classify hospitalisations in Denmark). We restricted our analyses to hospital encounters classified as inpatient admissions or emergency room visits. Outpatient hospital contacts were not included, as the registration of such contacts in the registries are not straightforward and could lead to bias.
To estimate the overall number of hospitalisations, we counted all non-overlapping and non-adjacent periods in between admission and discharge dates of inpatient admissions and emergency room visits. If no discharge date was available, we assigned a discharge date 14 days after the admission date. For the analyses, according to ICD-10 chapters, we classified the diagnoses (both primary and secondary) made during each hospitalisation. Since individuals might be registered with several diagnoses per hospitalisation, the sum of all hospitalisations according to the ICD-10 chapters is larger than the overall number of hospitalisations.
We described hospitalisations due to the different ICD-10 chapters by plotting the incidence rate by age intervals of 1 year separately for each trajectory group. To compare differences in the risk of hospitalisation between trajectory groups, we used time-to-event models for repeated outcomes using the Andersen-Gill method, which allowed for the same child to experience numerous hospitalisations during follow-up. Individuals were censored only if they died or emigrated. We used Cox survival analysis to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and Aalen survival analysis to estimate hazard rate differences with 95% CIs. We used age as the underlying time scale and stratified all analyses into early childhood (0–2 years), later childhood (3–15 years), and early adult life (16–24 years) to capture different disease patterns in these age groups. These age groups were defined based on knowledge about child development (where especially the first years of life should be assessed separately) combined with an empirical assessment of ages with comparable hospitalisation patterns based on our data. We found very similar patterns across birth cohorts, and the analyses are, therefore, presented combined across birth cohorts.
Our aim was to explore how childhood adversity relates to hospitalisation patterns. However, such adversity might at the same time be related to other early life risk factors such as being born preterm and being born small for gestational age. Social-related and family-related adversity are likely to affect the health of children already in utero and, if anything, such early life factors can be perceived as part of the mechanisms linking adversity and health. Additionally, parental education, parental country of origin, and teenage pregnancies are highly correlated with material deprivation, making it difficult to disentangle causes from effects. Thus, we only adjusted for these variables in a supplementary analysis ( appendix p 8 ). We also ran a supplementary analysis addressing inpatient care and emergency visits separately ( appendix pp 6–7 ). Data was prepared using Stata (version 14.2) and all analyses were conducted in R (version 4.0.3; the package survival was used for the Cox model and the package timereg was used for the Aalen model).
There was no funding source for this study.

Section: Results

508 168 children born between Jan 1, 1994, and Dec 31, 2001, from the DANLIFE dataset were followed up for 10·7 million person-years, with more than 3·8 million hospital admissions. The children were divided into five trajectory groups of childhood adversities identified in our cluster analysis based on all children born and raised in Denmark since 1980 ( figure 2 ).
In this sample, 310 396 (61%) children belonged to the low adversity group, which was characterised by a low rate of adversities across all dimensions. The early life material deprivation trajectory group (83 680 children, 16%) was characterised by a high annual rate of material deprivation during the first 4–5 years of life after which the rate became very low. The persistent material deprivation trajectory group (43 311 children, 9%) was characterised by a high annual rate of material deprivation during the entire childhood, but with a low rate of adversities in the other two dimensions. The loss or threat of loss trajectory group (56 204 children, 11%) was characterised by a high and increasing annual rate of loss or threat of loss during childhood. The high adversity trajectory (14 577 children, 3%) was characterised by a high and increasing annual rate of adversities in all three dimensions. Childhood adversity was associated with low parental education, low maternal age at birth, being born preterm, and being small for gestational age ( appendix p 5 ).
Figure 3 shows the incidence pattern of all hospital admissions from birth to 24 years of age, according to the five estimated trajectory groups of childhood adversities. As expected, the rate of hospital admissions is highest during the first 3 years of life and lowest during the primary school years. This pattern is consistent across all groups, but it is noticeable that the level of hospital admissions is consistently higher in all four adversity groups compared with the low adversity group. The high adversity group is especially characterised by a markedly higher rate of hospital admissions across all ages. For example, an HR of 1·94 (95% CI 1·88–1·99) was found for hospitalisation in early adult life in the high compared with low adversity group, corresponding to 243 additional admissions per 1000 person-years (95% CI 238–248), which means that 1000 young adults in the high adversity group will annually experience an additional 243 hospital admissions compared with 1000 young adults in the low adversity group. Across all groups, inpatient care is more prevalent in the first years of life, and emergency visits are more prevalent in later childhood and early adulthood; the higher risk of hospitalisation among children with high adversity, compared to those in other adversity trajectory groups, is consistent when looking at inpatient or emergency care only ( appendix pp 6–7 ).
Loss or threat of loss are also associated with a higher risk of hospital admissions, compared with low adversity, across all ages. For example, loss or threat of loss are associated with a higher risk of hospital admissions during early adult life (HR 1·44, 95% CI 1·42–1·47), corresponding to 115 additional hospital admissions per 1000 person-years. Rates of hospital admissions are only marginally higher in early life and persistent material deprivation groups compared with the low adversity group. In a subpopulation with information available on all covariates (483 580 individuals), we adjusted for sex, parental education, parental origin, maternal age at birth, being born preterm, and small for gestational age ( appendix p 8 ). This adjustment resulted in a slight attenuation of the associations, especially for the high adversity group, but the general pattern remained consistent.
Figure 4 shows hospitalisation patterns for the five childhood adversity trajectory groups as per ICD-10 chapter. Some of the figures are truncated due to few hospital admissions within a specific chapter at a specific age. There are clear age trends in the diagnostic patterns across the different chapters. For example, infections (chapter 1) and respiratory disease (chapter 10) are more prevalent early in life, and pregnancy-related diagnoses (chapter 15) are relevant only in early adult life. Notably, the high versus low adversity group has markedly higher incidence rates across all chapters except for neoplasms (chapter 2).
The high adversity group includes 14 577 (3%) children. Although high adversity is associated with a higher relative risk of hospital admissions across nearly all ICD-10 chapters, the absolute burden of disease (ie, the potentially preventable number of hospitalisations) is higher for some diagnostic chapters than others. The additional number of cases per 1000 person-years in the high versus low adversity group is, therefore, presented in figure 5 . Both relative and absolute measures and 95% CIs for all adversity groups are presented in the appendix (p 9) .
Across all age groups, there is a higher number of additional hospitalisations due to injury, poisoning, and external causes (chapter 19) in the high adversity compared with the low adversity group. This difference is particularly pronounced in early adult life, where 1000 people in the high adversity group annually experienced 114 additional injuries or poisoning hospitalisations compared with 1000 people in the low adversity group (hazard rate difference 114, 95% CI 110–118). Children in the high adversity group also experienced a high number of hospitalisations due to unspecified symptoms and signs (chapter 18) and factors influencing health service contacts (eg, health screening and observation; chapter 21) when compared with children in the low adversity group.
Higher rates of hospitalisation for some causes are apparent within specific age groups. In early childhood (0–2 years), children in the high adversity group experienced a higher rate of hospitalisations related to infectious diseases (chapter 1), diseases of the nervous system (chapter 6), diseases of the ear (chapter 8), respiratory disease (chapter 10), and congenital malformations (chapter 17) compared with the low adversity group. In early adult life (aged 16–24 years), high adversity was specifically associated with additional hospitalisations due to mental and behavioural diagnoses (chapter 5) and pregnancy and childbirth, including abortions (chapter 15) when compared with the low adversity group.
Although the highest rates were seen in the high adversity group, the early life and persistent material deprivation groups and especially the loss or threat of loss group also showed higher rates of several diagnoses. A full table of results for all the groups is available in the appendix (p 9) .

Section: Discussion

In a large nationwide study, we find that children who were exposed to a high level of adversity throughout their childhood experience parallel trajectories of poor health across nearly all diagnostic categories. This pattern was particularly strong for diagnoses related to injuries, unspecified symptoms and signs, and factors influencing health service contacts. It was also visible for respiratory and infectious diseases, congenital malformations, and diseases of the nervous system in early life; and mental and behavioural diagnoses and diagnoses related to pregnancy and childbirth in early adult life. Combined, these diagnoses translate into a substantial disease burden and suggest that childhood adversities and poor health outcomes are closely linked from birth and into adult life.
One in ten children experienced loss or threat of loss during childhood, and this group carried a moderately higher risk of hospitalisations within most diagnostic categories in childhood and early adult life. Children experiencing transient or even persistent material deprivation in isolation from other childhood adversities only show a modestly higher risk of a few specific diagnoses, such as diagnosis of a mental health problem. Notably, none of the childhood adversity groups were associated with a higher risk of neoplasms at this young age. This result contrasts with our previous findings of an 80% higher cancer mortality in the high versus low adversity group. These findings are, however, not directly comparable, as our paper is restricted to a maximum follow-up to 24 years, whereas cancer mortality was followed up to 35 years in our previous study. Also, childhood adversity might affect not only incidence, but also treatment-seeking behaviour and progression of cancer. More detailed analyses to better understand the relationship between childhood adversities and cancer are, therefore, warranted.
Our findings align with those of previous (mainly retrospective or cross-sectional) survey studies showing a higher risk of poor self-reported health, chronic conditions, such as mental illness, heart disease, and respiratory disease, as well as health-care utilisation associated with adverse childhood experiences. Another large registry-linkage study from Wales has previously shown that children living with a parent who has a mental disorder or suffers from alcohol abuse are at a higher risk of emergency hospital admissions. We add to this literature by quantifying the total burden of inpatient and emergency hospitalisations across all diagnostic categories associated with childhood adversities in a large-scale total population sample. Also, the existing literature on adverse childhood experiences tends to focus on household dysfunction and largely ignores the underlying social structures such as poverty and financial hardship, although these seem to be highly inter-related.
We provide a novel methodological framework for research into childhood adversities that simultaneously incorporates different dimensions of childhood adversity including material deprivation, health-related issues, and family dysfunction, and show how they interact and mutually reinforce each other over time. This methodological approach aligns with a syndemics approach to understand how multi-level, intertwined, and accumulated effects of social and biomedical factors shape disease burdens across populations. In line with this, we used high-resolution data to model parallel trajectories of childhood adversities and hospitalisations in childhood to understand the intertwined and accumulated patterns of social and health factors over time. These are likely to include bi-directional relations between health and adversity during childhood, and traditional temporal ordering of causes and effects were only present for hospitalisations occurring after 16 years of age. It should, however, be noted that the associations were consistent across all age groups, and that the strongest associations were found in those aged older than 16 years.
Children rely on the extensive care of their parents to protect them, but also to teach them the skills needed to thrive and survive in a complex world. Thus, children who are exposed to persistent adversity might be more susceptible to disease development through the adoption of health-damaging behaviours, lack of coping mechanisms, and impaired physiological and mental development. Such health disadvantages could persist across generations. Cumulative childhood adversity is, for example, associated with a markedly higher risk of post-traumatic stress disorders, and adversity experienced by the parent might end up representing childhood adversities of the next generation, potentially leading to intergenerational effects that can lock families into cycles of adversity, deprivation, and ill health.
Using nationwide registers and systematically adding a temporal dimension to the high-resolution childhood adversity data allowed us to follow up all children born in Denmark from birth and into adult life and comprehensively document the hospitalisation burden associated with childhood adversity. It also prevented problems with bias arising from missing data due to selective inclusion into or exclusion from the study. However, relying solely on register information comes at a cost, such as no information on, for example, family violence and child abuse. Also, a substantial part of the disease burden in childhood might never result in hospital admission. We comprehensively covered inpatient and emergency care, but there might still be relevant clinical outcomes not captured by these measures such as treatment in primary care, which might have led to an underestimation of the disease burden in some groups. We aimed to cover the entire spectrum of diseases, but we acknowledge that a categorisation based on global ICD-10 chapters is crude and that future studies should go into more details with specific codes. Using many and repeated indicators of childhood adversities and high-resolution hospitalisation data, we still hope to have captured important patterns, although we acknowledge that we might have underestimated the true effects of childhood adversities on health.
We excluded a small proportion of children who died or emigrated before the age of 16 years to model childhood adversity trajectories based on entire childhood histories. The vast majority of these exclusions were due to emigration, which is not assumed to be related to hospitalisation. Child mortality is very low in Denmark, but some children still died before the age of 16 years (3782 [0·7%] of 540 065 children), which might be related to both childhood adversities and hospitalisation patterns. Thus, we might have underestimated the associations between childhood adversities and hospitalisation by excluding children who died before the age of 16 years.
Our findings illustrate the need for preventive measures. Although an obvious option would be to use the rich data available in studies such as ours to screen families, it has been argued that suitable tools are not yet available for individual screening and clinical decision making. Preventive care services require a systematic weighing of benefits and harms to assess the net benefit, and introducing adverse childhood experience measures for individual screening is still premature. Alternatively, more upstream structural socioeconomic interventions such as income supplementation and housing interventions seem to be promising in reducing childhood adversity. Also, maternity and home visiting services that strengthen parenting skills have proven effective in improving child health in vulnerable families. Our findings highlight the close interconnections between social adversity and hospitalisation patterns, which suggest that hospitals and other clinical settings could serve as an entry point for the identification of social problems. Finally, adding a spatial or population segmentation dimension to this line of research might allow for the identification of high-risk populations, areas, or schools that would benefit from structural interventions aimed at reducing childhood adversity and proportionate support from health and social care services according to need at the community level.
In conclusion, we have quantified the hospitalisation burden associated with childhood adversities. It is striking that such strong and consistent associations between social adversity and health are found in the context of the Danish social security system, and even stronger associations might be found in countries with less social security. These associations most likely represent syndemics of interacting and mutually reinforcing mechanisms linking childhood adversities and poor health outcomes from birth and into adult life in an entire population and across generations. We find that a small proportion of children are exposed to repeated adversities across social, health, and family dimensions during their entire childhood and that these children carry a substantial disease burden. Hopefully, these findings will increase the awareness of the childhood origins of many health problems and underscore the need for upstream structural interventions to prevent childhood adversity and the associated disease burden.

Section: Data sharing

The data material contains personally identifiable and sensitive information. According to the Act on Processing of Personal Data, such data cannot be made publicly available. Inquiries about secure access to data under conditions stipulated by the Danish Data Protection Agency should be directed to the corresponding author.

Section: Declaration of interests

DT-R reports grants from the Medical Research Council during the conduct of the study and outside the submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

DT-R is funded by the Medical Research Council with a Clinician Scientist Fellowship (MR/P008577/1). LKE was supported by a Rubicon grant (45219105) of the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw).

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (661.37 KB) Supplementary appendix
