Title: Housing interventions for women experiencing intimate partner violence: a systematic review


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Intimate partner violence (IPV) is the leading cause of women's homelessness. However, what works best to respond to the needs of women experiencing IPV and homelessness remains unclear. We aimed to systematically review the effects of housing interventions on the physical, psychosocial, and economic wellbeing of women experiencing IPV.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this systematic review, we searched 15 electronic databases and conducted an extensive grey literature and hand reference search between Jan 29, 2020, and May 31, 2021. We included controlled quantitative studies of housing interventions (from emergency shelter to permanent supportive housing) that were reported in English, without time restrictions, and examined any physical, psychosocial, or economic outcomes among women experiencing IPV. We critically appraised included studies using the Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care criteria and extracted data using a piloted extraction form. We synthesised our results using harvest plots to summarise whether the weight of the evidence suggested benefits, disadvantages, or null effects; patterns by study quality; and evidence gaps. This study is registered with PROSPERO, CRD42020176705.

Abstract_Section: Findings

We screened 23 902 unique records and identified 34 eligible studies with quantitative data on the outcomes of housing interventions among women experiencing IPV. Most studies evaluated the outcomes of either shelter interventions (18 studies [53%]) or shelter plus some other programming (eight [24%]). The remaining eight studies evaluated longer-term housing solutions, including supportive housing (five studies [15%]), critical time interventions (one [3%]), transitional housing (one [3%]), and stay-at-home models (one [3%]). There was no cumulative evidence of disadvantages following any IPV-housing intervention. Evidence of benefits was strongest for mental health outcomes, intent to leave partner, perceived safety, and housing and partner-related stress. Included studies were at high risk of bias across most domains (eg, confounding).

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

There is promising evidence on the continuum of IPV-housing services for women, especially in terms of proximal outcomes, such as mental health, intent to leave partner, safety, and housing stress. However, more research of higher quality is needed, particularly on long-term housing solutions and from outside of the USA.

Abstract_Section: Funding

The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (430-2021-01176) and Canadian Institutes of Health Research (HSI-166388).

Section: Introduction

Physical, psychological, or sexual violence by a current or former partner is the most common form of violence against women (VAW). An estimated 30% of women have experienced physical or sexual intimate partner violence (IPV) worldwide. IPV has severe health consequences, including death, injury, and mental health problems. In addition, IPV is the leading cause of women's homelessness, which precipitates and exacerbates poor health conditions. The reduced availability of affordable housing (eg, due to increased housing shortages plus demand, limited incentives, and rising costs of living) paired with structural barriers to service access (eg, racism, sexism, homophobia, transphobia, ableism, or poverty) further increases the risk of women experiencing IPV-related homelessness. Given the high prevalence of IPV and its negative consequences for health and society, implementing effective preventive and response strategies is a priority for public health internationally. Safe, accessible, and affordable housing options—from emergency shelters to permanent supportive housing—are crucial to a holistic IPV response strategy.
Compared with men, women's homelessness is less visible in routine data because women experiencing homelessness are less likely to be in homelessness shelters or to sleep rough, which are the typical targets of point-in-time data captures. In addition to barriers in accessing emergency homelessness shelters, which are largely occupied by men, women can experience or have concerns around further structural or interpersonal violence in these shelters and when rough sleeping, such as state surveillance and child apprehension, which is especially the case for racialised and Indigenous women. This situation is perpetuated by the fact that most evaluated housing and homelessness services are gender blind and, as a result, best meet the needs of heterosexual, cisgender men, while failing to address the unique needs of women experiencing violence and homelessness. Organisations working to end VAW and provide housing for women are also underfunded and continue to struggle to meet the housing needs of women experiencing IPV. Therefore, women in violent relationships often rely on accommodation that is provisional (eg, someone else's home), overcrowded, or unaffordable (ie, where they cannot meet basic needs). Alternatively, women might keep living with violent partners because they cannot afford to leave or maintain child custody.

These circumstances have only been exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis. The pandemic has increased demand for VAW services and emergency and supportive housing, and has intensified challenges with service access. Governments in many countries have committed financial support for immediate crisis and long-term response strategies to gender-based violence and VAW housing. However, the most effective housing solutions for women to secure housing stability, maintain safety from further IPV, and receive trauma-informed care are unclear. In particular, there has been no systematic review of the available evidence on housing interventions for women, or specifically for women experiencing IPV (as the leading cause of women's homelessness), outside of the USA ( appendix p 1 ). This research gap has precluded full consideration of the differences in resources and policies between the USA and other countries internationally, and means that housing options available outside of the USA to prevent women's homelessness—eg, models that support women to stay in their homes while removing violent partners (ie, stay-at-home models) —have not been systematically reviewed ( appendix p 2 ). Consequently, conclusions on healthy policy and research directions across contexts have been hindered. Therefore, we aimed to systematically synthesise and appraise the international evidence on the effectiveness of housing interventions for women experiencing IPV.

Section: Methods

We reported this systematic review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines and the synthesis without meta-analysis guidelines. We implemented a systematic search strategy ( appendix pp 2–4 ), designed in consultation with an information specialist at St Michael's Hospital (Toronto, ON, Canada), to retrieve published and unpublished evidence. Study searching and inclusion started on Jan 29, 2020, and continued until May 31, 2021. Between Jan 29 and Feb 14, 2020, we searched 15 electronic databases for studies published without time restrictions using free-text terms and subject headings for housing, women and gender diverse populations, and IPV, tailored to each of the following databases: MEDLINE, PsycINFO, Embase, International Bibliography of the Social Sciences, Scopus, Social Service Abstracts, Social Work Abstracts, Sociological Abstracts, NCJRS, Web of Science, CINAHL, ASSIA, Cochrane Library, Campbell Collaboration, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. The full list of search terms can be found in the appendix (pp 2–4 ). We also conducted directed searches of Google Scholar, OpenGrey, the World Bank Open Knowledge Repository, the WHO Institutional Repository for Information Sharing, and the WHO Violence database, as well as key organisational websites based on the identified literature. These websites included the Homeless Hub, Wellesley Institute, Women's Homelessness in Europe Network, Centre for Housing Policy, the Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance, Australia's National Research Organisation for Women's Safety, and the Washington State Coalition Against Domestic Violence. We set up search alerts with Google Scholar and PubMed, hand-searched reference lists of included studies and relevant reviews, and consulted with knowledge user partners for any additional studies not identified.
Four reviewers (including ARY, AB, and NM) independently pilot tested the screening criteria on a random sample of 200 titles and abstracts to establish consistency. Pairs of reviewers then double screened the remaining titles and abstracts. At this stage, we included studies with quantitative data on interventions with a housing component for women experiencing IPV. The same reviewers then double screened eligible full texts (ARY screened all full texts) on the basis of the final eligibility criteria ( table 1 ). Briefly, we included controlled quantitative studies of housing interventions (from emergency shelter to permanent supportive housing) that were reported in English, and examined any physical, psychosocial, or economic outcomes among women experiencing IPV. We applied liberal study design criteria, given minimal experimental evidence in the field and to cover as much of the IPV-housing continuum as possible.
We extracted data from included studies using a piloted extraction form that included study characteristics (eg, sample, location, years of data collection), design, and outcomes. We evaluated study risk of bias using the Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care criteria. Reflecting the diversity of included studies, we also used additional criteria from the Joanna Briggs Institute critical appraisal checklist for quasi-experimental studies and the Cambridge Quality Checklists. ARY conducted data extraction and risk of bias assessments and a second reviewer (AB or NM) double checked a random 20% of studies, whereby no major discrepancies were found.
Given the high risk of bias of included studies, we did not conduct a meta-analysis. Instead, we graphically synthesised the evidence using harvest plots, which allowed for a summary of heterogeneous evidence that showed whether the weight of evidence suggested benefits, disadvantages, or null effects; patterns by study quality; and evidence gaps.
This study is registered with PROSPERO, CRD42020176705, and the protocol is available online on Open Science Framework.
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

After removing duplicates, we screened 23 902 titles and abstracts, followed by 415 full texts ( figure 1 ). This screening resulted in 34 studies with quantitative data on the outcomes of housing interventions among women experiencing IPV. There were 30 unique datasets: two pairs of studies each analysed the same shelter sample (a full and subgroup analysis in the USA and a full and subgroup analysis in Canada), and three studies evaluated the same randomised controlled trial of a supportive housing intervention in a sample of women, among whom the majority had experienced IPV recently ( table 2 ; appendix pp 4–5 ). The 34 studies were published between 1985 and 2021, with 17 (50%) published between 2011 and 2021. 23 studies (68%) were published in peer-reviewed journals, and the remainder were grey literature (mainly dissertations). 25 studies (74%) were based in the USA; the other countries represented were Canada, Australia, Israel, South Korea, and the Netherlands. Among studies that reported their settings, most took place in urban centres and none took place in rural settings alone.
The most common design was an uncontrolled before-and-after study (18 studies [53%]); seven studies (21%) evaluated randomised controlled trials ( table 2 ; appendix pp 4–5 ). Accordingly, the most common comparator analysed was the pre-intervention period (15 studies [44%]). Three before-and-after studies only examined variation in length of shelter stay, so were classified as using a control group receiving a partly different intervention, along with eight other studies (32%). The mean number of timepoints was 2·4 (SD 0·9), with a mean follow-up of 4·8 months (3·9). The mean sample size was 123 participants (SD 258).
Most studies evaluated the outcomes of shelter interventions (18 studies [53%]) or those of shelter plus some other programming—ie, shelter-plus models (eight studies [24%]; table 2 ; appendix pp 4–5 ). Standard shelter services included various programming, such as crisis intervention; safety planning; counselling; group support; IPV, family violence, and relationship education; legal advocacy; parenting support and education; children's programming; financial assistance; and vocational training. The plus component in evaluations of shelter-plus models was most often group-based support or individual psychotherapy or counselling. In two cases, plus equated to an analysis of variation in practices across shelters (ie, trauma-informed practices or substance use interventions ). The remaining studies evaluated longer-term housing solutions: one pilot study and three studies on a randomised controlled trial of a supportive housing intervention (including independent housing, individual substance use counselling, and case management services covering basic needs assistance and social service advocacy); a randomised controlled trial of a critical time intervention (strengths-based intervention providing continuity of care during transition from shelter to long-term housing); a cross-sectional study of Safe At Home (civil protection order supporting women to stay in their homes); and a controlled before-and-after study of transitional housing (up to 1 year of housing with case management, legal assistance, and therapy).
The most commonly studied outcomes were related to mental health (26 studies [76%]; table 2 ; appendix 4–5 ), including depressive symptoms, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and mood disturbance or psychological distress. Abuse-related experiences were the next most common outcome (22 studies [65%]), including reoccurrence of IPV, readiness or decision to leave partner, and perceived safety. The least commonly investigated outcomes were social or structural supports (15 studies [44%])—including social support and issues with money, housing, or employment—and physical health (six studies [18%]), including health-care use, pain, and overall health status.
The mean age of participants in the included studies was 31·7 years (SD 3·9). Although 15 studies (44%) did not report data on the ethnic or racial makeup of cohorts, 12 studies (35%) sampled participants of various ethnicities and races (no subgroup comprised >70% of the sample), and six (18%) sampled majority White participants. Nine studies sampled specific subgroups of women accessing housing interventions, including mothers (six studies [18%]), women with substance use or alcohol-related issues (six [18%]), those diagnosed with PTSD (one [3%]), or immigrants (one [3%]).
The appendix (pp 6–7 ) shows the risk of bias ratings for each included study. Risk of bias was concerning across all studies for most domains of bias ( figure 2 ). However, on the domains of selective outcome reporting (among all studies), differences in baseline outcomes being unaccounted for (among studies with between-subject variation), and intervention potentially affecting data collection (among before-and-after studies), the majority of relevant studies received low risk of bias ratings.
Figure 3 shows the harvest plots for all outcomes investigated in more than one included study. Notably, no study showed evidence that IPV-housing interventions led to disadvantages among participants. Mental health outcomes, such as depressive symptoms, PTSD, and psychological distress, largely showed evidence of reductions following housing interventions, mainly in the form of shelters ( figure 3A ). This trend was generally seen across study design and sample size; however, no study with a combinable outcome had more than 200 participants. By contrast, evidence on abuse-related and sociostructural outcomes (eg, social support, IPV, or employment or money stress) were more equivocal and sparsely populated, especially sociostructural outcomes ( figure 3B ). Although evidence was minimal, studies tended to find reductions in housing and partner stress, and increases in perceived safety and intent to leave partner following housing interventions. Only evaluations of long-term housing interventions, done in different samples by the same study team, considered independent housing as an outcome and found evidence for improvements. A single physical health outcome was investigated in more than one study ( figure 3A ), with two small, controlled studies examining health-care use before and after housing interventions. One of these studies investigated a shelter-plus social support intervention and found reductions in health-care use, whereas a study of a supportive housing model found no differences.
Few studies (n=4) conducted eligible subgroup analyses (ie, comparing controlled intervention effect estimates between subgroups), only one of which focused on differences in intervention outcomes by participants' social identities. In particular, one US-based shelter evaluation of 150 participants found that feelings of self-worth, guilt about the abuse, and helplessness after the shelter intervention (adjusting for pre-shelter values) did not differ among Black, Hispanic, and White women. By contrast, feelings of control over one's life were reported to be highest among Hispanic women following the shelter intervention, which the author hypothesised as being due to the benefits of bilingual services in the shelter.
Additionally, two studies analysed the same shelter evaluation, with one study focusing on the whole sample (mothers who experienced abuse) and the other focusing only on the subsample who were immigrants. In general, the subsample reported more beneficial outcomes after the shelter intervention (eg, reduced depressive symptoms, PTSD, and psychological distress) than did the total sample ( figure 3 ). However, the total sample study only compared length of stay in shelter, whereas the substudy reported the main effects of time (ie, outcome differences before and after shelter). Therefore, we cannot reliably infer differences in the observed outcomes between the two subgroups.
One study compared differences in outcomes of substance use among women in shelters with varying levels of substance use services (as defined by the study team on the basis of information from the shelters). The authors found that women reported lower alcohol and stimulant use after their shelter stay compared with before, but no changes in depressant or tobacco use. These results persisted regardless of the extent of substance use services at the shelter (all included shelters had at least minimal substance use services). No other study compared controlled effect estimates between different, externally defined intervention models.

Section: Discussion

To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first international systematic review of housing interventions for women experiencing IPV. As such, it is an important step forward in understanding what evaluative evidence is available on the full continuum of IPV-housing services and the extent to which this continuum is meeting the diversity of needs of women at risk of continued violence and homelessness. Without taking such a gender-based approach, homelessness prevention strategies risk further perpetuating gender-based inequities. As in a US-based review, we found that the evaluative evidence has been largely focused on emergency shelters, with less than a quarter of the available literature focused on longer-term housing solutions, which are crucial for ongoing stability and safety. Most of the combinable evidence has been centred on mental health outcomes, especially around symptoms of depression, PTSD, and psychological distress, with few studies focusing on abuse-related, sociostructural, or physical health outcomes. With these conditions in mind, there was no cumulative evidence of disadvantages following any of the studied IPV-housing interventions, from emergency shelter to long-term supportive housing. However, the evidence of benefits was more equivocal for outcomes not related to mental health, aside from intent to leave partner, perceived safety, and housing and partner-related stress. Although still understudied, these latter outcomes reflect proximal outcomes that would be expected to improve following IPV-housing interventions. Therefore, the observed benefits might be seen as evidence of the beginning of a hypothesised causal pathway to long-term personal and situational changes. These long-term goals are often conceptualised as, for example, freedom from violence, housing and economic security, empowerment, improved physical and mental health, and higher quality of life. Considering the mean endpoint for follow-up was 4·8 months, more evidence on the potential for positive effects in the long term is needed.
Despite searching for published and unpublished evidence internationally, the majority of the available evaluative evidence was from the USA and many longer-term housing models were under-represented ( table 1 ). These models included transitional housing, permanent supportive housing, and stay-at-home models, as well as housing subsidies, flexible funding, and reciprocal schemes, for which no eligible evidence was available. There is promising descriptive evidence on these interventions for women experiencing IPV and a scoping review identified positive effects of permanent supportive housing, critical time interventions, and housing subsidies in reducing homelessness among women in general. However, controlled evaluations with quantitative effect estimates of these housing interventions, for women experiencing IPV in particular, are essential to maximising effectiveness in addressing the needs of these women. Similarly, we did not identify evidence that met our eligibility criteria on housing interventions in low-income or middle-income countries. This evidence gap included, for instance, one-stop models, for which Olson and colleagues also highlighted the absence of effectiveness evidence. These models are a coordinated intersectoral strategy widely implemented across some low-income and middle-income countries (eg, Thailand, Malaysia, Kenya, and Zambia) that links or co-locates some combination of health, police, legal, psychosocial, or shelter services for women who experiencing IPV. We also found that most interventions were tested in urban sites only, with no IPV-housing intervention designed and evaluated specifically for rural areas, despite differing accessibility needs and contextual factors.
Reflective of the challenges of data collection and randomisation in the field, the available evidence is at high risk of bias for drawing causal conclusions around the effectiveness of IPV-housing interventions. Despite these research-related and practical challenges, there are areas for improvement. First, examples in this systematic review show the potential for randomised controlled trials in the field. In particular, randomised controlled trials can be used to evaluate novel and longer-term IPV-housing supports, shelter-plus models aiming to determine the best combination of supports, and instances in which interventions can be rolled out (and therefore stepped-wedge designs used), recognising that ethical randomised studies require equipoise (ie, uncertainty around effectiveness). However, where appropriate, randomised studies in the field need explicit reporting on random sequence generation and allocation concealment (ie, protecting the sequence that determines who is assigned to which intervention so that it cannot be interfered with). Randomisation will not be ethical or viable in terms of denying or delaying emergency shelter or housing. The large methodological literature on complex intervention evaluation is useful to leverage, especially in terms of making explicit assumptions around hypothesised intervention mechanisms and measuring the most crucial confounders and mediators, intervention components actually delivered, and contextual factors. Measures around interventions delivered and context are particularly important for capturing the dynamic nature of IPV-housing services and finding out whether fidelity of functions was maintained, compared with the traditional fidelity of form. Relatedly, all evaluations on IPV-housing interventions would benefit from measuring participants longitudinally and accounting for changes in outcomes over and above secular trends. The evidence base would be further strengthened by more studies with control groups to compare outcomes, which could be created from community-based samples or from those receiving another specific intervention.
Only one study did a formal subgroup analysis to investigate whether intervention effects varied by participants' social identities or locations. There were several studies that conducted descriptive comparisons between subgroups; for example, comparing whether point-in-time needs or treatment received varied by race. Therefore, evaluations of IPV-housing interventions that rigorously investigate subgroup differences in programme effects are needed to ensure that we understand not only what works but also for whom. This review further identified important evidence gaps on sampling in IPV-housing intervention evaluations. Nearly half of the included studies did not report the ethnicity or race of the sample, which is concerning given robust evidence that racialised women experience housing and IPV services differently. Most of the studies predominantly sampled younger adults (mean age <35 years). Although young adulthood is a period when women are at particularly high risk of experiencing IPV, older women (especially those aged ≥60 years) experiencing abuse have unique needs and challenges in service access that are important to address in IPV-housing interventions. There was also no eligible analysis of gender or sexual identity, even though our search included terms for gender diverse populations. Such an analysis is an important area for future research, given the disproportionate burden of IPV and homelessness among gender and sexual minority populations, as well as the tendency for a heteronormative focus in IPV programming.
We also identified that an additional area of growth for the evidence base on IPV-housing interventions is outcome measurement. To date, there has been a large focus on client satisfaction and goal attainment, and this was reflected in the available evaluations. We did not include data on these outcomes because our interest was in concrete personal or situational changes following intervention, a crucial tenet of establishing intervention effectiveness. By contrast, subjective measures of experiences and perceptions are best suited to qualitative data, beyond the scope of this review but a focus of our overall project. Programme evaluation benefits from use of both types of data. Nevertheless, quantitative data collection does not need to exclude the expertise of women who have experienced IPV or of service practitioners; instead, knowledge user partnerships can strengthen each stage of intervention design and evaluation. In the case of outcome measurement, women who have experienced IPV and service practitioners can collaborate on developing the conceptual model of how interventions are expected to work in practice or be polled regarding the most important outcomes to evaluate. From there, evaluators should select robust measures that capture these outcomes, so that rather than measuring goal attainment, validated measures of hypothesised goals, such as housing, safety, employment, and improved health outcomes, are included in the evaluation.
This review only considered outcomes related to women and not that of their children, pets, partners, or others, which are also important considerations for women experiencing IPV and for preventing violence and homelessness. We only searched for studies using English search terms and included studies available in English, which means that relevant non-English studies could have been missed. We did not include studies evaluating interventions that occurred during or after shelter stay without an additional housing component or baseline data collection that started at or close to shelter intake. This decision was made because our focus was on the housing component of interventions. However, other systematic reviews of IPV service interventions have shown benefits of such programming in improving mental health and reducing abuse, including advocacy, and individual psychotherapy and group support. Despite its limitations, this study is an essential extension to existing knowledge syntheses on housing interventions ( appendix p 1 ), which have not included an analysis on IPV or gender-based interventions, international evidence, non-randomised evaluations, or an assessment of study risk of bias. By applying methods for systematic reviews and graphical syntheses to the international evidence on IPV-housing interventions, we have produced the most conclusive understanding to date on the benefits and uncertainty around different intervention models, the evidence gaps across the full intervention continuum, and key areas for methodological improvement.
This review systematically identified promising evidence on the IPV-housing service continuum for women. Across shelter and long-term supportive housing models, we observed cumulative evidence of benefits among women who have experienced IPV, particularly in terms of mental health outcomes, intent or decision to leave partner, safety, and housing stress. However, the scope of the problem of IPV and homelessness among women clearly exceeds the available evaluative evidence. More research of higher quality is needed that considers what works best and for whom, especially on long-term housing solutions outside of the USA. Given high need and initial positive evidence, policy makers and practitioners should continue to invest in and innovate across the IPV-housing continuum, including shelters with robust social support and psychotherapy interventions, permanent supportive housing with trauma-informed care, stay-at-home models, and flexible and housing-specific funding and advocacy. These efforts should be coupled with rigorous and dynamic monitoring and evaluation systems to meaningfully advance the evidence base and, ultimately, maximise the likelihood of positive outcomes for women experiencing IPV.

Section: Data sharing

The review protocol is publicly available on PROSPERO and Open Science Framework. Extraction data sheets can be made available upon request to the corresponding author.

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (430-2021-01176) and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (HSI-166388). We thank Carolyn Ziegler (St Michael's Hospital, Unity Health Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada) for her feedback on our systematic search strategy and Melissa Perri (University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada) for her technical support in study searching and screening.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (566.21 KB) Supplementary appendix
