Title: Adverse childhood experiences and related outcomes among adults experiencing homelessness: a systematic review and meta-analysis


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are strong risk factors for homelessness and poor health and functioning. We aimed to evaluate the lifetime prevalence of ACEs and their associations with health-related and functioning-related outcomes among homeless adults.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we searched from database inception to Nov 11, 2020, for original and peer-reviewed studies in English that documented lifetime prevalence of ACEs or associations between ACEs and health-related or functioning-related outcomes. We selected studies if they included a definable group of homeless adults and measured at least four ACE categories. We calculated pooled estimates of lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs and four or more ACEs with random-effects models. We used the leave-one-out method in sensitivity analyses and studied meta-regressions to explore potential moderators of ACE prevalence. We also did a narrative summary of associations between ACEs and health-related and functioning-related outcomes, as there were too few studies on each outcome for quantitative meta-analysis. This study is registered with PROSPERO, CRD42020218741.

Abstract_Section: Findings

We identified 2129 studies through systematic search, of which 29 studies (16 942 individuals) were included in the systematic review, 20 studies (10 034 individuals) were included in the meta-analysis for one or more ACEs, and 15 studies (5693 individuals) were included in the meta-analysis for four or more ACEs. Studies included samples of adults experiencing homelessness in the USA, Canada, and the UK; participants in the included studies were predominantly male (65·2%) and mean ages ranged between 18·3 and 58·1 years, but many studies did not report race, ethnicity, and sexual and gender minority data. Lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs among homeless adults was 89·8% (95% CI 83·7–93·7) and the lifetime prevalence of four or more ACEs was 53·9% (45·9–61·7). Considerable heterogeneity was identified in both meta-analyses ( I 2 >95%). Of the potential moderators analysed, the ACE measurement tool significantly moderated the estimated lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs and four or more ACEs, and age also significantly moderated the estimated lifetime prevalence of four or more ACEs. In the narrative synthesis, ACEs were consistently positively associated with high suicidality (two studies), suicide attempt (three studies), major depressive disorder (two studies), substance misuse (two studies), and adult victimisation (two studies).

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

The lifetime prevalence of ACEs is substantially higher among homeless adults than among the general population, and ACE exposure might be associated with prevalence of mental illness, substance misuse, and victimisation. Policy efforts and evidence-based interventions are urgently needed to prevent ACEs and address associated poor outcomes among this population.

Abstract_Section: Funding

Rhodes Trust and Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

Section: Introduction

In 2019, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development estimated that there were nearly 1·9 million people experiencing homelessness in 35 member countries with available data. People experiencing homelessness contend with intersecting physical, mental, and social burdens that contribute to poor health and functioning. Compared with their housed counterparts, rates of mental health and substance use disorders, infectious diseases, unintentional injuries, and poorly controlled chronic diseases are substantially higher among people experiencing homelessness. These and other factors, such as systemic barriers to health care, contribute to considerably higher mortality and morbidity among the homeless population than among the general population.
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) encompass a wide range of early traumas that occur during childhood, including direct (eg, abuse and neglect) and indirect (eg, household mental illness and domestic violence) types. Many studies have shown strong associations between ACEs and negative health-related and social-related outcomes. Dose–response associations between ACEs and poor outcomes have also been consistently reported; the pioneering Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)-Kaiser Permanente ACE Study noted that adults who were exposed to one ACE were 1·7 times more likely to have attempted suicide than adults who were exposed to zero ACEs, whereas adults who were exposed to four ACEs were 3·9 times more likely, and adults who were exposed to seven or more ACES were 17·0 times more likely. Investigations have provided insights into the physiological and developmental mechanisms of toxic stress that link ACEs with later life outcomes. Early trauma disrupts functional brain development, chronically activates inflammatory pathways, and shortens telomere length, thereby resulting in disease and functional and cognitive deficits throughout the life course.

Many studies have reported on the prevalence of ACEs among the general population. A previous meta-analysis of 19 studies that were published between 2006 and 2018 reported that the prevalence rates of one or more ACEs were 58·4% in North America and 42·2% in Europe. There are few studies of ACEs in the homeless population. One review looked at the prevalence of physical and sexual abuse during childhood among homeless adults in 24 studies that were done in the USA, UK, and Canada. The study reported pooled prevalence rates of 37% for childhood physical abuse and 32% for childhood sexual abuse. These rates were many times higher than those in the general population, which have been previously reported to be 4–16% for physical abuse and 5–10% for sexual abuse. However, this review captured only two categories of ACEs and omitted many other important categories, including emotional abuse, neglect, and household dysfunction.
ACEs are independent risk factors for both poor health and homelessness in adulthood. An analysis of a nationally representative survey of over 34 000 non-institutionalised US adults reported that the population attributable fraction that was associated with exposure to any ACE for lifetime homelessness was 61·3% for women and 45·3% for men. Factors linking ACEs to adult homelessness include fragmented familial ties, decreased social support, and limitations in education and employment. Notably, the association between homelessness and health is bidirectional. Homelessness is a risk factor for poor health, and some mental health and substance use disorders are also risk factors for homelessness. These complex relationships suggest that the burden of ACEs among the homeless population is likely to be higher than among the general population.
Past reviews of ACEs have intentionally excluded people experiencing homelessness. To our knowledge, no study has synthesised lifetime prevalence estimates of ACEs among adults experiencing homelessness or systematically reviewed their associations with health and functioning in this population. Quantifying the extent of ACE exposure and its effects is crucial for understanding the unique needs of this vulnerable population and informing better policies and services. Systematically reviewing the scientific literature also presents an opportunity to improve the quality of ACE studies in the homeless population and identify areas for standardisation in the field of homelessness and ACE research. As such, we sought to estimate the lifetime prevalence of ACEs, evaluate study and sample characteristics that potentially moderate ACE prevalence, and comprehensively review associations between ACEs and health and functioning among homeless adults.

Section: Methods

We did a systematic review and meta-analysis following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology guidelines. There were four inclusion criteria for the systematic review and meta-analyses. First, studies had to include a definable group of individuals experiencing homelessness, defined as being unsheltered or emergency sheltered according to the Canadian Definition of Homelessness. Second, the homeless sample must have included predominantly adults, with a mean age of at least 18 years or all people in the sample being older than 16 years. The age restriction is important to ensure that all included individuals had a full exposure period, given that ACEs are defined to occur before adulthood (ie, before the age of 18 years). Third, studies had to use a cumulative ACE measure that covered at least four ACE categories. This requirement follows past precedent in the ACE literature and ensures that studies are capturing the construct of ACEs and not a single type of early adversity. ACEs were operationally defined as events that directly or indirectly harm children through their living environments. Finally, studies must have reported either (1) the lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs, or four or more ACEs, in the sample or (2) associations between ACE exposure and health-related or functioning-related outcomes. The category of one or more ACEs assesses any exposure whereas the category of four or more ACEs assesses exposure to multiple ACEs, a cutoff that is widely used in the ACE literature. Functioning-related outcomes included any non-health-related outcomes or those related to activities of day-to-day life (eg, criminal justice involvement) and were left deliberately broad to evaluate the full range of possible effects of ACEs in the homeless population. Studies were excluded if they were not peer reviewed, were not available in English, or did not report findings from original data (eg, reviews and meta-analyses).
The search strategy was adapted from past systematic reviews on ACEs and homelessness and was developed in conjunction with an academic expert specialising in systematic reviews (HE). Keywords pertaining to the population (ie, individuals experiencing homelessness) and exposures (ie, ACEs) were combined, and search terms that were used are reported in the appendix (p 1) . We searched MEDLINE, Embase, and PsycINFO databases from inception to Nov 11, 2020, through the Ovid platform to find all relevant studies. Results were exported to Covidence for removal of duplicates and screening. Manual forwards and backwards reference searching were done on all included studies to identify additional relevant studies. Titles, abstracts, and full texts were screened independently by two members of the study team (ML and LL) in Covidence. Any disagreements were resolved through discussion until consensus was reached or with a third member of the study team (JL), if necessary.
The protocol for this study is available online.
We extracted data from all included studies into a customised Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. We extracted information regarding country of study, year of data collection, site of recruitment, sample size, age, gender breakdown, ACE measurement tool, lifetime ACE prevalence, and outcomes. We contacted study authors to request any missing data. We assessed the quality of the included studies using criteria that were based on the standard principles of quality assessment. Studies received a point for each quality criterion that they met, for a maximum score of six. Studies that had not reported information relevant to a quality criterion did not receive a point, and studies for which a quality criterion was not applicable received a point. We checked all included studies for retractions or other erratum. Two members of the study team (ML and LL) independently extracted data and assessed quality. Any disagreements were resolved through discussion until consensus was reached, or with a third member of the study team if necessary (JL).
Sufficient studies were included to do a meta-analysis on lifetime ACE prevalence among adults experiencing homelessness; more than two studies were identified that satisfied our inclusion criteria and appropriately answered the research question. When multiple studies reported prevalence data from the same sample, we included the study of highest quality in the meta-analysis. If studies had the same level of quality, we included the study with the largest sample in the meta-analysis. For studies that used the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form, ACE prevalence estimates were established on the basis of the low cutoff for exposure level. The Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form measures exposure to five ACEs at four different exposure levels (ie, none, low, moderate, or severe). This decision was made to maintain consistency, given that most ACE instruments ascertain the presence or absence of a particular ACE and not the severity of exposure.
We used random-effects models to calculate pooled estimates of lifetime ACE prevalence of one or more ACEs and four or more ACEs. We used the Clopper-Pearson method to generate 95% CIs for included studies and the inverse variance method to weight each study in the meta-analysis. We did not do any further formal analyses of within-study variability. We quantified heterogeneity between studies with the I 2 statistic and the p value for heterogeneity (Cochran's Q statistic). We did leave-one-out analyses as sensitivity analyses to explore the influence of individual studies on the main results. We also evaluated small-study effects visually with funnel plots and statistically with Egger tests. p values of less than 0·05 signified evidence of publication bias among the included studies.
Finally, we did meta-regression analyses with mixed-effects models to evaluate potential moderators of study-level estimates of ACE prevalence. We explored the sample size of studies, age of participants (ie, young adults [age <30 years]) or adults [age ≥30 years]), year of data collection (ie, within the past decade [2011–21] or before the past decade [2010 or earlier]), proportion of women in the sample, country of study, number of ACEs measured (ie, ten or less than ten), and study quality (ie, score of ≥4 or <4) as potential moderators. We did univariable meta-regression with individual potential moderators to evaluate unadjusted effects. We also did multivariable meta-regression to evaluate adjusted effects with all potential moderators included in models.
Meta-analyses of associations between ACEs and health-related or functioning-related outcomes could not be conducted because there were too few studies assessing the same outcomes or studies assessed associations at different levels of ACE exposure. We have, therefore, presented a narrative summary instead. When multiple studies reported associations between ACEs and outcomes for the same sample, we reported the association from the study of highest quality in the meta-analysis; if studies had the same level of quality, then we reported the association from the study with the largest sample.
All statistical analyses were done in R (version 3.6.3) with the packages meta and metafor. This study is registered in the PROSPERO database, CRD42020218741.
The funders of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

We identified 3356 potentially eligible studies from the systematic search, of which 29 were ultimately deemed to be relevant and included in the systematic review ( figure 1 ). The percentage agreement between reviewers was 90% (1924 of 2129) for title and abstract screening and 96% (468 of 488) for full-text screening.
Included studies collected data between 1989 and 2018, and sample sizes ranged from 25 people to 2241 people ( table 1 ). The 29 included studies encompass samples of adults experiencing homelessness in three countries: 16 (55%) studies in the USA, 12 (41%) studies in Canada, and one (3%) study in the UK. The main recruitment sites were homeless shelters (18 studies), clinics and facilities that provide services to people experiencing homelessness (20 studies), and street or outdoor encampments (14 studies). Included studies recruited homeless young adults (ten [34%] studies), homeless adults (nine [31%] studies), homeless adults with mental illness (five [17%] studies), older homeless adults (one [3%] study), homeless mothers (one [3%] study), homeless adults with a dual diagnosis of mental illness and substance use disorder (one [3%] study), homeless young adults with psychosis (one [3%] study), and homeless young adults involved in commercial sex (one [3%] study). All studies used cross-sectional designs to study ACEs.
Quality of studies was generally moderate, with most studies providing adequate demographic descriptions of samples and ascertaining ACEs with validated or well described instruments ( table 2 ). Only four (14%) of the 29 included studies used a random or whole population sampling approach to recruit participants. Nine (31%) studies were deemed to have additional bias, predominantly due to selective recruitment of subgroups of the homeless population. Notably, most studies (18 [64%] of 28; criteria were not applicable to one study) did not report any information about overall response rates, and an even larger number of studies (21 [78%] of 27; criteria were not applicable to two studies) did not report information about people who declined to participate.
All but one study (28 [97%] of 29) considered ACE exposure by use of retrospective and self-reported data. The one other study used administrative data to ascertain documented early trauma through records from child protective services in California, USA. Of the included studies, 14 (48%) studies ascertained ACE exposure by use of the CDC-Kaiser Permanente ACE scale, seven (24%) studies used the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form, and eight (28%) studies used other instruments or scales ( appendix p 6 ). The specific ACE categories that were measured by included studies are reported in table 3 . The most frequently measured ACE categories were physical abuse (n=28), sexual abuse (n=28), emotional, verbal, or psychological abuse (n=27), and neglect (n=26). Some other ACE categories, including housing problems, poverty, family trouble, general abuse, intimidation, verbal abuse within the family, and physical abuse within the family, were measured by only one included study each.
Not all 29 studies that were included in the systematic review reported lifetime ACE prevalence estimates. 20 (69%) studies (10 034 participants) were included in the meta-analysis of lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs, and 15 (52%) studies (5693 participants) were included in the meta-analysis of lifetime prevalence of four or more ACEs. The overall pooled estimate of lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs was 89·8% (95% CI 83·7–93·7) among homeless adults ( figure 2 ). Significant heterogeneity was observed between studies ( I 2 98·6%; p<0·0001). The funnel plot is shown in the appendix (p 11) and shows asymmetry on the basis of visual inspection. The result of the Egger test statistically confirmed the possibility of publication bias (p=0·0026). The overall pooled estimate of lifetime prevalence of four or more ACEs was 53·9% (95% CI 45·9–61·7) among homeless adults. Significant heterogeneity was observed again between studies ( I 2 95·9%; p<0·0001). The funnel plot is shown in the appendix (p 12) and does not show asymmetry on the basis of visual inspection. The result of the Egger test statistically supported this absence of evidence for publication bias (p=0·37). The leave-one-out sensitivity analyses are reported in the appendix (pp 2–3 ) for the meta-analyses of lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs and of four or more ACEs. No single study had an outsized effect on either pooled lifetime prevalence estimates.
Results from the univariable and multivariable meta-regression analyses for the meta-analysis of lifetime prevalence of one or more ACEs are shown in the appendix (p 4) . None of the potential moderators were significantly associated with ACE prevalence in the univariable models for one or more ACEs. The multivariable model indicated that studies measuring ten ACEs (ie, those using the CDC-Kaiser ACE scale) reported higher ACE prevalence than did studies using instruments that measured fewer ACEs (β 1·3 [SE(β) 0·65]; p=0·044). Meta-regression results from the meta-analysis of the lifetime prevalence of four or more ACEs are shown in the appendix (p 5) . In univariable models, studies of homeless adults (aged ≥30 years) reported lower ACE prevalence than did studies of homeless young adults (aged <30 years; β −0·78 [SE(β) 0·38]; p=0·036). Studies that used the CDC-Kaiser ACE scale reported higher ACE prevalence than did studies using other instruments (β 1·0 [SE[β] 0·33]; p=0·0016). None of the potential moderators were significantly associated with ACE prevalence in the multivariable model for four or more ACEs.
15 (52%) of the 29 included studies reported associations between ACE exposure and health-related or functioning-related outcomes among homeless adults. A narrative summary of associations is reported in table 4 , broken down by definition of ACE exposure, significance of associations, and direction of associations. Of outcomes that were assessed by two or more studies, ACE exposure was consistently associated with high suicidality, past suicide attempt, major depressive disorder, substance misuse, and adult victimisation in all studies that evaluated ACE exposure and these outcomes. Many studies reported no association between ACE exposure and involvement in the criminal justice system as an adult among homeless adults.

Section: Discussion

This study shows a strikingly high lifetime prevalence of ACEs among adults experiencing homelessness. Nearly nine in ten homeless adults have been exposed to at least one early traumatic experience, and more than half of homeless adults have been exposed to four or more early traumatic experiences. This result suggests that lifetime prevalence estimates of ACEs in the homeless population might be substantially higher than in the global general population; for which prevalence of exposure to one or more ACEs is estimated to be 38–39% and prevalence of exposure to four or more ACEs is estimated to be 3–5%. The studies in our narrative review suggest that exposure to ACEs among adults experiencing homelessness is associated with suicidality, past suicide attempt, major depressive disorder, substance misuse, and victimisation. Null associations between ACEs and adult criminal justice involvement were observed in the homeless population, which stands in contrast to associations among the general population. One possible explanation is that both criminal justice involvement and ACEs are risk factors for homelessness, thereby modifying the associations that are observed among the homeless population.
Another important finding is that most ACE studies among homeless adults were done in Canada or the USA. The disproportionate representation of ACE studies from North America was also reported in another review of homeless adults. This pattern in the literature is most likely due to the paucity of ACE and homelessness research in other high-income countries and in low-income and middle-income countries. The experience of homelessness and inadequate housing can vary by country, but understanding the prevalence and effects of early adversities among homeless populations in all settings should be made a research priority.
This study has some limitations. First, nearly all studies included in this systematic review and meta-analysis used retrospective and cross-sectional study designs. Although ACEs occur early in life, it is not possible to ascertain the temporal order of homelessness and poor health and functioning with the available data. Future studies should leverage prospective study designs to disentangle this temporality. Second, this study excluded theses, abstracts, and studies that were not available in English. These exclusions might have contributed to the absence of included studies that were done outside of North America or countries where English is not a primary language.
Considerable heterogeneity was observed in both meta-analyses and can be attributed to several factors. First, the meta-regression identified that studies using the CDC-Kaiser Scale measuring ten ACEs reported higher ACE prevalence rates than did studies using other scales measuring fewer ACEs. A consistent ACE scale should be more widely used to promote standardisation and comparability across studies. The CDC-Kaiser Scale is popular, but some studies suggest that including additional adversities, such as poverty, community violence, and peer victimisation, could enhance the scale. Second, all but one study that was included in the analyses ascertained ACEs by use of retrospective and self-reported data. This method of ACE measurement is susceptible to recall and reporting biases, which vary across participant personality traits and dispositions. Third, there was potential selection bias given that only four included studies used random or whole-population sampling approaches. Relatedly, the quality assessment also identified that most studies did not report response rates and information about people who declined to participate, resulting in potential non-response bias. Finally, many included studies did not collect or report data for important characteristics that are known to be associated with ACE prevalence in the general population, such as race, ethnicity, and sexual and gender minority identity.
The funnel plot ( appendix p 11 ) showed potential publication bias in the meta-analysis for prevalence of one or more ACEs. However, there are study-specific characteristics that might explain the asymmetry in the funnel plot. The one large study that reported a relatively lower prevalence than other studies ascertained ACEs through administrative records. This method of ACE measurement has been shown to underestimate true ACE prevalence given that administrative data capture only reported cases of early trauma. The three smaller studies that reported a relatively higher prevalence than other studies recruited homeless young adults with mean ages ranging from 19·6 years to 22·2 years. Other studies in the general population have reported inverse associations between age and self-reported ACE prevalence, potentially due to premature mortality among individuals with high ACE exposure and elevated stigma surrounding ACE reporting among older adults.
The extraordinarily high lifetime prevalence of early trauma among homeless adults indicates that providers working with this population should ideally be trained in trauma-informed care. Services for this population, such as shelter accommodations and housing interventions, should also be built on trauma-informed principles. For example, Housing First is one model that prioritises client strengths, choices, respect, and safety by providing permanent housing to homeless individuals without any preconditions. Agencies and programmes providing services to this population should also consider incorporating ACE screening into the standard of care. Understanding ACE exposure could support early identification of poor outcomes and referral to additional supports. Given strong associations between ACEs and poor mental health outcomes among homeless adults, efforts are needed to improve training and incentivise mental health professionals to provide high-quality and on-site services at shelters and programmes serving this population. Evidence suggests that interventions to promote resilience and social support might mitigate poor mental health outcomes that are associated with ACEs among homeless adults.
Estimates suggest that annual costs associated with ACEs exceed US$1·3 trillion in Europe and North America. These tremendous financial costs, and the fact that ACEs serve as common risk factors for both poor health and homelessness, should spur investment in widespread primary prevention of ACEs. Several early life and parenting interventions, such as the Family Nurse Partnership, Triple-P, and Incredible Years programmes, have been shown to cost-effectively prevent ACEs and their later sequelae in diverse settings. Perhaps most importantly, the expansive literature has repeatedly shown that the occurrence of ACEs is also tied to social determinants of health, including poverty, systemic racism, and intergenerational trauma. The substantial downstream consequences of ACEs should motivate policy makers to prioritise addressing the upstream and structural causes of early trauma that collectively drive enduring health inequities.
In summary, this systematic evaluation shows that ACE exposure is almost universal among adults experiencing homelessness. These findings should spur investments in ACE prevention programmes, given that ACEs are common risk factors for homelessness and poor health. Agencies and service providers should promote trauma-informed care and be equipped to identify ACEs among homeless individuals. People who screen positive for ACEs could be referred to additional trauma-specific interventions, alongside housing, case management, and other services that are routinely offered to this population. The complex relationships between ACEs, homelessness, and social disadvantage necessitate efforts to address the upstream and structural determinants of health that produce inequities throughout the life course. Collaboration between front-line providers, researchers, and policy makers is urgently required to prevent and mitigate ACEs and associated poor outcomes among this vulnerable population.

Section: Data sharing

Extracted data sheets will be made available immediately after publication of this study. Data sheets are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. The protocol for this study is available from PROSPERO, CRD42020218741.

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

This study was supported by a Rhodes Scholarship awarded to ML and a Canadian Institutes of Health Research Foundation Grant (FDN-167263) awarded to SWH.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (597.22 KB) Supplementary appendix
