Title: Association between influenza vaccination and risk of stroke in Alberta, Canada: a population-based study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Respiratory infection can be an immediate precursor to stroke and myocardial infarction. Influenza vaccination is associated with reduced risk of myocardial infarction and hospitalisation for cardiac disease, and influenza vaccination is strongly recommended for patients with heart disease. Evidence on whether the same protective association exists for stroke, and whether this potential effect is consistent across age and risk groups, is conflicting. We aimed to assess the risk of stroke after influenza vaccination in adults.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We obtained administrative data from the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (which covers all residents of Alberta, Canada) beginning on Sept 30, 2009, or May 15 of the year in which residents were recorded as being 18 years of age. Individuals were censored at the earliest of three events: death, recorded outmigration, or Dec 31, 2018. The outcome of interest was any stroke event, comprising acute ischaemic stroke, intracerebral haemorrhage, subarachnoid haemorrhage, and transient ischaemic attack. We used Andersen-Gill Cox models to analyse the hazard of any stroke event for individuals with recent (<182 days) influenza vaccination compared with those without recent influenza vaccination, with adjustment for age, sex, anticoagulant use, atrial fibrillation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, hypertension, income quintile, and rural or urban home location. Two-way interaction terms between each individual covariate and vaccination status were used to assess for effect modification by risk factor. The association between vaccination and risk of each type of stroke was also modelled, adjusting for baseline covariates.

Abstract_Section: Findings

The study sample consisted of 4 141 209 adults (29 687 899 person-years of observation time) registered under the provincial health-care system between Sept 30, 2009, and Dec 31, 2018. 1 769 565 (42·73%) individuals received at least one vaccination during the study period, and 38 126 stroke events were recorded. Adjusted for demographics and comorbidities, recent influenza vaccination significantly reduced the hazard of stroke (hazard ratio 0·775 [95% CI 0·757–0·793]). This association persisted across all stroke types. We found effect modification by each covariate examined except for home location; however, vaccination was associated with a reduced risk of stroke overall across all ages and risk profiles with the exception of individuals without hypertension.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

The risk of stroke is reduced among people who have recently been vaccinated against influenza compared with those who have not. This association extended to the entire adult population and was not limited to individuals with a baseline high risk of stroke. Further studies in a variety of settings are needed to evaluate whether influenza vaccination could be used as a public health strategy to prevent stroke.

Abstract_Section: Funding

None.

Section: Introduction

Globally, the life-saving benefits of vaccinations have been re-emphasised by the COVID-19 pandemic. Vaccinations can also have wider indirect benefits beyond preventing infection or reducing the severity of infection.
Stroke is the third leading cause of death and disability globally, yet its immediate trigger is not always identifiable; the reasons why a stroke occurs on a specific day at a specific time are most often simply not known, even when there are known underlying risk factors such as atrial fibrillation, carotid artery atherosclerotic stenosis, or chronic hypertension. However, infectious diseases are known to be linked to stroke, and a large body of evidence links recent infection, particularly respiratory infections, with stroke. Pathological evidence shows direct infection of atherosclerotic plaques by both viral and bacterial agents, such as cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae , Chlamydia pneumoniae , Helicobacter pylori , and others. Proposed mechanisms by which infection might trigger stroke include platelet activation and aggregation, inflammation or dehydration inciting thrombosis, impaired endothelial function, arterial dissection, and infection-induced cardiac arrhythmias.
Influenza is a common respiratory infection that precedes stroke. Aside from reducing the risk of illness and mitigating illness severity, vaccination against influenza viruses could have indirect benefits in preventing stroke. Influenza vaccination is associated with a reduced risk of myocardial infarction and hospital admission for cardiac disease. The association between influenza vaccination and decreased risk of cardiac mortality and cardiac ischaemic events persists beyond influenza season, suggesting that this benefit is not solely due to the prevention of influenza infection. Among susceptible patients with known heart disease, the guidelines of the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology and the European Society of Cardiology strongly recommend annual influenza vaccination. However, there is conflicting evidence as to whether influenza vaccination is associated with a decreased risk of stroke and, if so, whether this effect is consistent across stroke types, ages, and risk groups.

In Alberta, Canada, comprehensive vaccination data are available for the entire population. We used these data to assess the risk of stroke after influenza vaccination.

Section: Methods

The province of Alberta, Canada, has a population of 4 464 170 people (Oct 1, 2021). Alberta undergoes a natural population increase of approximately 30 000 individuals annually (births minus deaths) and net immigration of approximately 42 000 individuals annually. Alberta has a single-payer public health-care system in which all residents are assigned a Personal Health Number under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP), which allows for administrative data-based tracking of patient care, including that funded by the federal rather than provincial government (military personnel, members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and Indigenous peoples). The unique Personal Health Number also allows for direct linkage of administrative databases.
This study was approved by the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board at the University of Calgary (Calgary, AB, Canada). Informed consent was not required because of the population-based and anonymised nature of the study.
We obtained population-level data from all individuals registered under the AHCIP from Sept 30, 2009, to Dec 31, 2018. Individuals contributed observation time beginning on the latest of two dates: Sept 30, 2009, or May 15 of the year in which they were recorded as being 18 years of age. Individuals were censored at the earliest of three events: death, recorded outmigration, or Dec 31, 2018.
The exposure of interest was recent seasonal influenza vaccination. Seasonal influenza vaccinations are provided by the province, at no charge to individuals, under the AHCIP. Influenza vaccination information was obtained from the Immunization & Adverse Reaction to Immunization Registry, which contains all immunisation records for the Alberta population. Individuals were considered to be exposed to the influenza vaccination for the 182 days (6 months) following vaccination.
The outcome of interest was any stroke. Outcome events were identified using the Morbidity and Ambulatory Care Abstract Reporting System (MACAR) and quarterly population registries. A stroke event was defined using the International Classification of Diseases 10th edition (ICD-10) Clinical Modification codes in the main diagnostic position (the diagnosis most responsible for the longest length of hospital stay). The definition of stroke included acute ischaemic stroke (codes I63.x, I64.x, and H34.1), intracerebral haemorrhage (I61.x), subarachnoid haemorrhage (I60.x), and transient ischaemic attack (G45.x). Codes for transient global amnesia (G45.4) and central venous sinus thrombosis (I63.6, I67.7, and G08) were excluded. This administrative data definition of stroke has been validated in Alberta, with a study showing that agreement between expert neurologist chart review and ICD-10 coding was high overall (κ=0·89) and that ICD-10 coding for all stroke types had high positive-predictive value (acute ischaemic stroke 0·85, intracerebral haemorrhage 0·98, subarachnoid haemorrhage 0·91, and transient ischaemic attack 0·97).
Patient-level covariates of interest included age (because of privacy regulation, individuals’ birth dates were not obtained; age was solely provided at the cohort midpoint of May 15, 2014), sex, rural or urban home location (defined using postal codes), a prescription for anticoagulant medication, and the following comorbidities: atrial fibrillation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), diabetes, and hypertension. Due to the nature of administrative data, data on ethnicity or race were not available. Quintile of median neighbourhood income (defined by Statistics Canada, and based on income tax reporting), an ecological variable, was assigned to patients according to their home neighbourhood. Comorbidities were chosen a priori as conditions that were both known to be important risk factors for stroke and other cardiovascular outcomes, and which might predispose individuals to a higher likelihood of receiving an influenza vaccination, because vaccination is strongly recommended for individuals at high risk of vascular events. Pragmatically, these conditions are also well documented in administrative data, with validated case definitions having high sensitivity and specificity ( appendix pp 2–3 ). Covariates were identified using linked data from the AHCIP, MACAR, and the Canadian Census (years 2011 and 2016). All covariate case definitions are given in the appendix (pp 2–3) .
We used Andersen-Gill Cox models to analyse the hazard of any stroke for individuals recently exposed to the seasonal influenza vaccination compared with individuals not recently exposed to the seasonal influenza vaccination. The Andersen-Gill model is a simple extension of the Cox model for recurrent or multiple events. It allows a single patient to contribute multiple pieces of information depending on the number of events observed and assumes that the time increments between events are conditionally uncorrelated given the covariates. As recurrent events within patients might not be independent biologically, robust variance estimators were applied in the model. The Anderson-Gill model also allows for the proper characterisation of vaccination exposure as a time-varying covariate in which individuals are considered to be exposed to the influenza vaccine for the 182 days following their vaccination (and are otherwise unexposed). Using the date of diagnosis, comorbidities were also considered time-varying covariates. Due to the nature of administrative data, anticoagulant use data reflects patients being prescribed an anticoagulant, but does not necessarily indicate medication adherence. As such, anticoagulation use data were treated as non-time-varying, with individuals categorised into two groups: ever prescribed an anticoagulant or never prescribed an anticoagulant. Quintile of median neighbourhood income (dichotomised into top quintile vs all other quintiles) was considered time-varying, with values from the 2011 Canadian Census used for the years 2009–15 and values from the 2016 Canadian Census used from 2016 onwards. The individual's home location was categorised as either rural or urban based on postal code. A primary model adjusting for all covariates was developed, as well as models assessing the two-way interactions between each individual covariate and vaccination exposure adjusted for all other covariates. An additional model, restricted to individuals observed for the entire study period, was developed to analyse the interaction between the degree of risk reduction associated with vaccination and the number of vaccines received over the study period. All analyses were done using Stata 17.
There was no funding source for this study.

Section: Results

5 315 405 individuals making up 38 433 655 person-years of follow-up were registered in the AHCIP between Sept 30, 2009, and Dec 31, 2018. We excluded a total of 1 174 196 individuals on the basis of being younger than 18 years for the entire observation window (n=1 108 424), not contributing any observation time to the study (either due to meeting an exit criterion [ie, being censored] before meeting cohort entry criteria or due to the nature of population registry data only being reported quarterly; n=65 763), or having no age recorded (n=9). After the removal of observation time that occurred before cohort entry (ie, paediatric observation time for individuals becoming 18 years of age mid-study) and after cohort exit, the analysis population consisted of 4 141 209 adult individuals with a total observation time of 29 687 899 person-years ( figure 1 ).
Over the study period, 6 772 403 influenza vaccinations were administered and 1 769 565 (42·73%) individuals received at least one influenza vaccination. The number of influenza vaccinations varied by individual; 96 826 individuals received an influenza vaccination in every year they were in the study, including 29 288 individuals who received a vaccination in all ten influenza seasons encompassed by this study. 38 126 stroke events were recorded, of which 34 471 (90·41%) were first stroke events. Among the strokes that were recurrent events (~10%), the maximum number of stroke events in a single individual was nine.
Overall, the group of individuals who received at least one influenza vaccination was older, consisted of a higher proportion of women, and had higher rates of comorbidities than the group of individuals who had never received an influenza vaccination. The proportion of individuals living in urban areas was slightly higher in the vaccinated group; however, the proportion of individuals in the highest income quintile was similar across both groups ( table ).
The crude incidence of stroke was higher among individuals who had ever received an influenza vaccination (1·25%) compared with those who had not (0·52%; table ). However, this crude observation was confounded. Adjusted for age, sex, comorbid illness, and socioeconomic status, recent vaccination (within 182 days) was associated with a reduced hazard of stroke (hazard ratio [HR] 0·775 [95% CI 0·757–0·793]). When stratifying by stroke type, similar estimates were seen for acute ischaemic stroke (0·742 [0·722–0·763]), intracerebral haemorrhage (0·730 [0·677–0·787]), and subarachnoid haemorrhage (0·803 [0·716–0·901]), whereas the risk of transient ischaemic attack was reduced to a lesser extent than were other stroke types in vaccinated individuals (0·915 [0·870–0·963]; figure 2 ). This effect was also consistent for recurrent stroke (0·744 [0·687–0·805]) when restricting the analysis population to individuals with a first stroke event.
To further investigate whether the benefit of vaccination was consistent across subgroups, we used nine separate models, each including an interaction term between one of the covariates and vaccination, with adjustment for all other covariates ( figures 3–5 ; appendix p 4 ). All interactions were statistically significant except for rural or urban home location.
Vaccination was associated with a reduced risk of stroke in both men and women, but the magnitude of benefit was larger in men (HR 0·722 [95% CI 0·699–0·745]) than women (0·833 [0·807–0·860]; figure 3 ), perhaps because unvaccinated men had a significantly higher baseline hazard of stroke than did unvaccinated women ( figure 4A ). Vaccination was associated with a greater relative reduction in stroke risk in younger age groups (relative increase in HR of 1·002 [1·000–1·004] per year increase in age; figure 4D ), although the baseline risk of stroke in younger individuals was low, leading to a small absolute effect. Vaccination was also associated with a greater reduction in risk of stroke in the four lowest income quintiles (0·766 [0·748–0·786]) than in the highest quintile (0·826 [0·780–0·874]), in those with diabetes (0·685 [0·659–0·711]) than in those without diabetes (0·829 [0·806–0·853]), in those with COPD (0·712 [0·678–0·748]) than in those without COPD (0·793 [0·773–0·813]), and in those prescribed anticoagulants (0·679 [0·653–0·706]) than in those not prescribed anticoagulants (0·918 [0·893–0·944]; figure 3 ). As with other comorbidities, vaccination was associated with a reduced hazard of stroke among individuals with and without atrial fibrillation, but had a larger effect size in people with versus people without atrial fibrillation ( figure 3 ); however, in contrast to other risk factor strata, the baseline risk of stroke was similar regardless of atrial fibrillation status ( figure 5E ).
We found no evidence of an interaction of home location (urban vs rural) with vaccination; vaccination reduced the hazard of stroke in urban (HR 0·783 [95% CI 0·762–0·804]) and rural (0·755 [0·723–0·788]) groups by a similar amount (p=0·16; figures 3, 4C ).
Notably, an unexpected interaction effect was identified for hypertension: vaccination was associated with reduced risk of stroke in patients with hypertension (HR 0·728 [95% CI 0·710–0·746]), but was associated with a slight increase in the risk of stroke in patients without hypertension (1·146 [1·084–1·211]; figures 3, 5D ). In exploratory, unadjusted estimates comparing those ever vaccinated with those never vaccinated, influenza vaccination was not protective against stroke in patients either with (risk ratio 1·079 [95% CI 1·035–1·124]) or without hypertension (2·826 [2·754–2·901]). We also observed a higher proportion of females in the non-hypertensive vaccinated population (57·25%) than in the vaccinated hypertensive population (47·76%), and found that the non-hypertensive never-vaccinated stratum had a young mean age (37·88 years) and a relatively small number of events (8509 events among 2 189 843 individuals).
Dose–response is an important component of the argument for causality. We examined the risk of stroke after varying dose exposure to influenza vaccination among individuals who were observed for the entire study period (n=2 407 425). A significant interaction was identified between vaccination protection and number of vaccines received (p<0·001), whereby vaccination protection increased with number of vaccines. People who were vaccinated serially every year were at a lower risk of stroke (HR 0·432 [95% CI 0·309–0·604]) than were those who received one vaccination (1·082 [0·931–1·258]). Estimates for each number of vaccinations received are available in the appendix (pp 5–6) .

Section: Discussion

Based on an analysis of comprehensive data from the entire population of a province of Canada, there is a clear and clinically relevant association between recent vaccination against influenza and a reduction in the hazard of stroke compared with no recent vaccination. This association was present across all stroke types, and extended to the entire adult population and was not limited to people at high risk of stroke.
A new finding of this study is that vaccination was associated with lower hazard of stroke for all stroke types. Although the degree of relative hazard reduction varied by stroke type, the strongest effect sizes were found for acute ischaemic stroke and intracranial haemorrhage, with nominal differences between them. A slightly smaller effect size was observed for atraumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage, and the smallest effect size was seen for transient ischaemic attack, perhaps because any effect was diluted by misclassification bias due to non-ischaemic causes of a transient ischaemic attack-like presentation. Previous smaller studies have investigated the relationship between influenza vaccination and stroke. Some of these studies found no association between influenza vaccination and first or recurrent stroke, whereas many others have reported a reduced risk of first or recurrent stroke among vaccinated patients across several populations using a variety of study designs. Among studies that classified stroke by type, the protective effect was only reported for patients with ischaemic stroke, whereas the benefits did not extend to other stroke types. By contrast, our study found this benefit to apply to all stroke types. The observation of a protective association suggests an avenue for further basic research on the biological importance and mechanisms of inflammatory triggers for the onset of all stroke types.
Our study found evidence of effect modification (statistical interaction) between vaccination and all covariates investigated, except urban or rural home location. Predominantly, this effect was a reduction in stroke hazard associated with recent vaccination across all individuals, but a numerically larger relative benefit was seen among individuals with a higher baseline risk of stroke due to the presence of common risk factors, such as particular comorbidities.
We found that vaccination was associated with lower hazard of stroke in men and women; however, the magnitude of effect was much larger in men. Previous work has also shown this protective effect in men, but not in women. Our findings also contrast with other work reporting no interaction between vaccination and sex or social class. Similarly, our results show protection in both people with diabetes (with a greater effect size than in people without diabetes) and without diabetes, which contrasts with the mixed findings from previous studies showing vaccination having no interaction with diabetes status or an interaction whereby vaccination was not protective among people with diabetes. Vaccination was also found to be associated with a lower hazard of stroke across people of all ages, with a larger absolute reduction in hazard with increasing age. However, the relative reduction in risk was modified by age in a counter-intuitive direction, such that there was a larger relative reduction in risk at younger ages. This effect might be related to the decreased biological response to vaccination in older age, the increased risk of stroke in older age, or perhaps a greater role of infectious triggers for stroke in younger versus older people. This finding contradicts previous studies in which there were mixed findings related to age: either that the protective effect of vaccination did not persist in older people (aged >75 years) or did not exist in younger people (aged <65 years).
This generalised indirect benefit of influenza vaccination for stroke prevention is a new finding. Influenza vaccination is strongly recommended by associations such as the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology and the European Society of Cardiology for individuals with known heart disease or other risk factors for stroke. However, our data provide evidence that influenza vaccination is associated with reduced stroke risk for the entire population and not just those individuals with known risk factors for stroke. For example, the relative increase in HR per year increase in age was very small (1·002 per year increase in age) and is not likely to be clinically important, indicating that public health messaging should target all age groups and not just older adults. We found evidence of statistical interactions between all covariates and vaccination (with the exception of home location), indicating a statistical difference in magnitude of hazard reduction by risk factor profile; however, it is simply not certain that these small differences in magnitude of effect by risk factor profile are clinically meaningful. Overall, the association of influenza vaccination with reduced risk of stroke is generalised to the entire population.
Without adjustment for other covariates, influenza vaccination was not protective in patients either with or without hypertension. After adjusting for comorbidities, vaccination was strongly associated with a reduced risk of stroke in patients with hypertension; however, there was a non-intuitive interaction, contrasting with previous studies, such that vaccination in patients without hypertension was associated with a marginally higher risk of stroke compared with no vaccination. We observed that the non-hypertensive vaccinated population was much more likely to be female, and that the young average age of the non-hypertensive never-vaccinated stratum was associated with a small number of outcomes. A possible explanation for this finding is that the increase in stroke risk in vaccinated non-hypertensive individuals might represent vaccine-seeking behaviour due to other non-vascular risk factors for poor health outcomes, such as a history of cancer or autoimmune disease, conditions for which we could not adjust. In this situation, vaccination is acting as a latent variable, identifying these individuals at risk of stroke rather than being causative in increasing the risk of stroke. Another possibility is the misclassification of hypertension status by way of undiagnosed hypertension. We also do not have blood pressure measurement or medication data and therefore cannot classify the severity of hypertension or compliance with hypertension treatment, which might influence our findings. Alternatively, this finding might simply be due to chance.
There are several reasons why we can assert a causal relationship between influenza vaccination and protection against stroke. The simplest is direct and the most biologically plausible: vaccination protects the individual from influenza, which is a known risk factor for stroke, and one that might be proportionally more important in younger people. On a population basis, community peaks in influenza infection precede community peaks in stroke by about 3 weeks. However, there might be a wider indirect effect as well, consistent with the findings that the association between influenza vaccination and cardiac mortality persists outside of the influenza season and previous work showing that, in addition to recent vaccination, any influenza vaccination in the previous 5 years was protective. It has been suggested that modulation of the immune response might produce antibodies that act as agonists on athero-protective pathways, inducing antioxidant and anti-inflammatory responses. In addition, the use of the Anderson-Gill Cox model design and a 182-day exposure period after vaccination shows the temporality of the exposure–outcome relationship. The effect size observed here is both large (a 23% reduction in hazard) and consistent across age, sex, and risk factor subgroups. Furthermore, the effect size appears to be largely consistent with previous smaller studies and, by analogy, similar to that observed in a biologically similar condition, cardiac disease. A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials found that influenza vaccination was associated with a lower risk of major adverse cardiovascular events (risk ratio 0·66 [95% CI 0·53–0·83]). Given the similarities in patient-level factors among those having cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events, the large effect size seen in randomised controlled trial data using cardiovascular endpoints, and the observational evidence provided in this study for stroke, it might be prudent to study stroke as an endpoint in a randomised trial in the future. Finally, we observed a significant interaction between the degree of risk reduction associated with vaccination and number of vaccinations received, whereby the magnitude of hazard reduction increased with number of vaccinations received, a potential dose–response effect.
A limitation of this study is that we cannot disentangle the biological effect of the influenza vaccine and the act of being vaccinated. Although it is biologically plausible that the influenza vaccine might be associated with reduced stroke risk, it is also plausible that individuals seeking seasonal immunisations have higher health literacy and perhaps healthier lifestyles, leading to an inherent reduced stroke risk. Another explanation is that individuals at higher stroke risk seek repeated vaccinations, explaining part of the dose–response effect observed in the current study. We have attempted to control for these confounders through demographic factors such as home location (urban or rural) and median neighbourhood income quintile, as well as comorbidities associated with higher stroke risk; however, there might be other factors involved, resulting in residual confounding. A similar consideration relates to the health-promoting behaviours of health-care providers. For example, younger people might not be as strongly advised to receive influenza vaccinations as are older people, or people with comorbidities such as diabetes might be more strongly advised to receive vaccinations compared with people without comorbidities. Future research should focus on health literacy or health-promoting behaviours as important confounders in this relationship.
There are two major strengths to this study. First, this study used data from an entire population over a period of ten influenza seasons, encompassing over 29 million person-years of observation time. This removes the risk of sampling bias, to which non-population-based studies can be prone. Second, this study occurred in a province with one single-payer universal health-care system, mitigating the risk of misclassification of either the exposure or outcome because all patient records are maintained by this single health-care system. However, there exists the possibility of attrition bias in this study due to the nature of administrative data, in which outmigration can occur without documentation. If undocumented outmigration were to happen, there might be individuals considered under observation for a longer than the period for which they truly were observed. In this artificial observation time, there would be no opportunity for vaccination or stroke event status to be recorded. As such, these individuals could only contribute observation time as individuals not under vaccine protection with no stroke events, potentially artificially inflating the estimated person-time not under vaccination protection, and possibly leading to underestimation of the number of outcome events (in both the vaccinated and non-vaccinated groups). This underestimation would result in bias towards the null, meaning that if there were substantive misclassification due to undocumented outmigration, the magnitude of the effect of vaccination against stroke risk described in this study might be an underestimate. These data originated from a single province in a high-income country with a publicly funded health-care system; as such, wide generalisability to other areas globally might be limited.
In summary, using data from an entire population in a Canadian province, we have shown that there is a clear indirect benefit of influenza vaccination in reducing the risk of stroke. This effect was persistent across all stroke types and extended to all adults, including those without risk factors for stroke. These data suggest that broad influenza vaccination might be a potentially viable public health strategy to reduce the risk of stroke.

Section: Data sharing

Due to the nature of this research using administrative data across a population, participants of this study did not agree for their data to be shared publicly, so supporting data are not available.

Section: Declaration of interests

Outside of the current work, MDH reports grants from Biogen, Medtronic, Boehringer Ingelheim, NoNO, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, and Alberta Innovates; consulting fees from Sun Pharma Brainsgate; US patents 62/086 077 and 10 916 346 licensed to Circle NVI; data safety monitoring board roles in the RACECAT trial (Chair, ended 2020), Oncovir Hiltonel trial (Chair, ongoing), DUMAS trial (Chair, ongoing), ARTESIA trial (member, ongoing), and BRAIN-AF trial (member, ongoing); leadership roles in The Canadian Neurological Sciences Federation (President, not for profit) and the Canadian Stroke Consortium (board member, not for profit); and stock ownership in Circle and PureWeb. JKH reports funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. All other authors declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

We thank Alberta Health for providing the data. The views expressed in this Article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Government of Alberta or Alberta Health.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (254.61 KB) Supplementary appendix
