Title: Effectiveness of contact tracing in the control of infectious diseases: a systematic review


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Contact tracing is used for multiple infectious diseases, most recently for COVID-19, but data regarding its effectiveness in disease control are scarce. To address this knowledge gap and inform public health decision making for COVID-19, we systematically reviewed the existing literature to determine the effectiveness of contact tracing in the control of communicable illness.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We searched PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library from database inception up to Nov 22, 2021, for published studies evaluating associations between provider-initiated contact tracing for transmissible infectious diseases and one of three outcomes of interest: case detection rates among contacts or at the community level, overall forward transmission, or overall disease incidence. Clinical trials and observational studies were eligible, with no language or date restrictions. Reference lists of reviews were searched for additional studies. We excluded studies without a control group, using only mathematical modelling, not reporting a primary outcome of interest, or solely examining patient-initiated contact tracing. One reviewer applied eligibility criteria to each screened abstract and full-text article, and two reviewers independently extracted summary effect estimates and additional data from eligible studies. Only data reported in published manuscripts or supplemental material was extracted. Risk of bias for each included study was assessed with the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool (randomised studies) or the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale (non-randomised studies).

Abstract_Section: Findings

We identified 9050 unique citations, of which 47 studies met the inclusion criteria: six were focused on COVID-19, 20 on tuberculosis, eight on HIV, 12 on curable sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and one on measles. More than 2 million index patients were included across a variety of settings (both urban and rural areas and low-resource and high-resource settings). Of the 47 studies, 29 (61·7%) used observational designs, including all studies on COVID-19, and 18 (38·3%) were randomised controlled trials. 40 studies compared provider-initiated contact tracing with other interventions or evaluated expansions of provider-initiated contact tracing, and seven compared programmatic adaptations within provider-initiated contact tracing. 29 (72·5%) of the 40 studies evaluating the effect of provider-initiated contact tracing, including four (66·7%) of six COVID-19 studies, found contact tracing interventions were associated with improvements in at least one outcome of interest. 23 (48·9%) studies had low risk of bias, 22 (46·8%) studies had some risk of bias, and two (4·3%) studies (both randomised controlled trials on curable STIs) had high risk of bias.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

Provider-initiated contact tracing can be an effective public health tool. However, the ability of authorities to make informed choices about its deployment might be limited by heterogenous approaches to contact tracing in studies, a scarcity of quantitative evidence on its effectiveness, and absence of specificity of tracing parameters most important for disease control.

Abstract_Section: Funding

The Sullivan Family Foundation, Massachusetts General Hospital Executive Committee on Research, and US National Institutes of Health.

Section: Introduction

Contact tracing is defined by WHO as “the process of identifying, assessing, and managing people who have been exposed to a disease to prevent onward transmission”, which informs important follow-up actions such as diagnostic tests, post-exposure prophylaxis, and quarantine. Contact tracing has been used in the control of infections including smallpox, tuberculosis, HIV, other sexually transmitted infections (STIs), Ebola virus, and, now, COVID-19. The objectives of contact tracing include identifying potential new cases before they might infect others (with referrals to care and social supports when indicated), detecting clusters of cases before they expand, and improving overall understanding of disease dynamics ( appendix p 2 ).
Although observers have highlighted apparent successes of contact tracing for COVID-19 in places including Taiwan, Vietnam, and US states such as Massachusetts , quantitative data are scarce on the strategy's effectiveness for disease control in practice. Furthermore, contact tracing has implementation challenges in some settings; in a study of 74 185 patients with COVID-19 in the USA, 49 480 (66·7%) patients were not reached to elicit contacts or reported zero contacts. Previous systematic reviews focused on tracing for other infections, including tuberculosis and HIV, confirmed a high prevalence of these diseases among patients' close contacts, yet remained unable to conclude the exact “contribution of contact tracing to reducing the burden of disease in the population”. Improving our understanding of contact tracing's effectiveness in disease control has substantial public health importance, particularly given ongoing SARS-CoV-2 transmission and the potential for future pandemics. Although the yield of contact tracing is likely to be influenced by the specific pathogen, population, and strategy involved, lessons from tracing programmes within specific contexts might help to inform best practices for disease control within and across disease categories (including for novel diseases such as COVID-19).

To address this knowledge gap and to inform public health decision making, we conducted a systematic review of published studies that used empirical data to evaluate the effectiveness of contact tracing to control the spread of infectious diseases.

Section: Methods

We conducted a systematic review in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines. We searched PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library for studies in the published literature starting from database inception up to Nov 22, 2021, with no date or language restrictions. Our search used the terms “contact tracing”, “contact investigation”, “contact examination”, “contact screen”, or “partner notification” or their permutations. The full protocol and search strategy are provided in the appendix (pp 4, 21–23) . We manually reviewed reference lists of reviews identified during the search for additional study articles to include.
We included clinical trials and observational studies evaluating the effect of contact tracing interventions specifically implemented by public health or health-care workers (ie, provider-initiated contact tracing, as previously defined; appendix p 5 ) on the control of transmissible infectious diseases. Transmissible infectious diseases were classed as all those transmitted through human-to-human contact. We included studies that had evaluated one of three outcomes of interest: case detection rates among contacts or at the community level (hypothesised to increase with contact tracing); overall forward transmission of disease as measured by the reproduction number (R; hypothesised to decrease), secondary attack rates (hypothesised to decrease), or similar measures (including cases and deaths prevented, reinfection rates among contacts, and treatment rates among contacts, where increased treatment rates were interpreted as a proxy for decreased forward transmission); and overall disease incidence (hypothesised to decrease). Other downstream disease outcomes, such as mortality, were considered but beyond the scope of this review. We included studies evaluating the effects of provider-initiated contact tracing compared with the absence of contact tracing or with patient-initiated contact tracing ( appendix p 5 ). Studies evaluating expansions or programmatic adaptations of pre-existing provider-initiated tracing services and studies comparing provider-initiated tracing to tracing programmes without follow-up actions (such as instructions for contacts to present for testing or to avoid others for a specific period of time) were also included. We excluded studies that used mathematical modelling only; did not have a control group; did not report one of our outcomes of interest; or solely examined patient-initiated contact tracing.
We uploaded search results to Covidence software for deduplication, screening, and data extraction. After elimination of duplicate records, one reviewer (among ADH, JJ, AE, CXH, and AR) independently screened each abstract for full-text review and applied eligibility criteria to each full-text article; in cases of uncertainty, abstracts or full texts in question were reviewed by three reviewers and included or excluded by consensus.
Using a standardised form created for the review, two reviewers (among ADH, JJ, AE, CXH, and AR) independently extracted the following data from eligible studies: authors, infection studied, years of study, location and setting, study design, study population, sample size (numbers of index patients and contacts), details of contact tracing intervention, effect measured, and effect size. For the purposes of this study we considered summary effect estimates, with confidence intervals and p values when provided. Two reviewers (among the same group) then independently assessed risk of bias for each included study, using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool for randomised studies and the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale for non-randomised studies. Conflicts in data extraction or bias assessments were adjudicated by discussion between the two reviewers regarding each domain within the extraction form or bias tool to reach consensus, or by independent completion of the bias assessment by a third reviewer.
When possible, tracing and control approaches were categorised with consistent definitions ( appendix p 5 ). Provider-initiated contact tracing included both provider referral (in which a trained health worker notifies contacts of their infection exposure and the need for evaluation or other actions) and contract referral (in which a trained health worker and index patient make an agreement that the health worker will not notify contacts until a prespecified time has passed during which time the index patient agrees to notify contacts and refer them for services themselves). Because tuberculosis is the most studied disease among all the diseases included, we additionally stratified tuberculosis studies by World Bank country classification (low income, lower-middle income, upper-middle income, or high income) and by burden of tuberculosis (high-burden or lower-burden settings, as defined in the appendix [p 6] ).
We report on studies categorised by disease and type of contact tracing intervention (studies on provider-initiated contract tracing and those on programmatic adaptations within provider-initiated contact tracing), summarising the findings of each study and the risk of bias for each study. We expected that interventions and outcomes would be too heterogeneous for meta-analysis and thus did not plan to meta-analyse the data.
The funders of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

We identified 14 254 records, including 5238 duplicates, from the database search ( figure ). 34 additional articles were identified by manually searching reference lists. We screened 9050 unique abstracts, yielding 361 full-text articles to be assessed for eligibility, of which 314 were excluded. Of the 47 included articles evaluating contact tracing interventions, six were focused on COVID-19 ( table 1 ), 20 on tuberculosis ( table 2 ), eight on HIV ( appendix pp 11–14 ), 12 on curable STIs (syphilis, gonorrhea, trichomoniasis, chlamydia, and STI syndromes; appendix pp 15–19 ), and one on measles ( appendix p 20 ). Included studies were conducted across five continents ( appendix p 3 ), with study years ranging from 1975 to 2020. The 47 studies comprised 18 (38·3%) randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and 29 (61·7%) observational studies. 40 studies compared provider-initiated contact tracing with other interventions or evaluated expansions of provider-initiated contact tracing, and seven studies compared programmatic adaptations within provider-initiated contact tracing. 23 (48·9%) studies had low risk of bias, 22 (46·8%) studies had some risk of bias, and two (4·3%) studies (both RCTs on curable STIs ) had high risk of bias ( appendix pp 7–8 ). 29 (72·5%) of the 40 studies evaluating the effect of provider-initiated contact tracing, including four (66·7%) of six COVID-19 studies and 11 (68·8%) of 16 RCTs and quasi-RCTs, found contact tracing interventions were associated with improvements in at least one outcome of interest.
All six studies examining contact tracing for COVID-19 were observational ( table 1 ). The studies were primarily based in high-income countries, where additional social distancing measures were simultaneously in place. Four studies included a total of 1·9 million index patients, and the other two studies were population based. Fetzer and Graeber analysed a natural experiment enabled by a computer error in the UK in September, 2020, that delayed contact tracing for 15 841 index patients. By comparing areas more affected versus less affected by the computer error, they found that each late referral was associated with 18·6 additional COVID-19 cases and 0·24 additional deaths over 6 weeks. Two other UK-based studies also reported positive effects of contact tracing. On the Isle of Wight, initiation of traditional contact tracing and concurrent digital contact tracing (exposure notification via a smartphone application downloaded by more than 54 000 [>38%] of 141 536 in the population) was associated with a reduction in the basic reproduction number (R 0 ) from 1·3 on May 5, 2020, to 0·5 on June 29, 2020. A separate matched-neighbours regression estimated that every percentage point increase in uptake of the same application across England and Wales between Oct 8 and Dec 31, 2020, led to a 2·26% (95% CI 1·50–3·00) reduction in COVID-19 cases. Another study from South Korea found widespread identification and testing of individuals linked with clusters of COVID-19 cases was associated with a reduction in the time-varying reproduction number (Rt) from 1·3 (Jan 24 to March 8, 2020) to 0·6 (March 9 to May 2, 2020). The other two studies did not find evidence in support of COVID-19 contact tracing. An analysis of all COVID-19 cases from 130 countries (Jan to June, 2020) found only a weak relationship between contact tracing and Rt, specifically an association with higher Rt values, which could not be well distinguished from other clustered interventions and was hypothesised as potentially reflecting increased case detection from tracing. A study from Portugal found no difference in COVID-19 secondary attack rates when tracing and quarantine measures were initiated either before laboratory confirmation of disease (12·1% [95% CI 7·1–18·9]) or after (9·2% [7·8–10·8], p=0·13). Of note, secondary attack rates might appear to be increased by contact tracing as a consequence of increased detection of cases among contacts.
20 studies examined contact tracing for tuberculosis ( table 2 ). These studies included more than 168 000 index patients across a diversity of settings, including urban and rural areas, high-burden and lower-burden areas (in terms of tuberculosis prevalence, incidence, or case notification rate), and all World Bank income levels ( appendix pp 9–10 ). A variety of tracing approaches were described between and within studies, including household contact tracing (17 of 20 studies) and screenings of neighbours (three studies) and co-workers (one study; table 2 ).
17 studies evaluated the effect of provider-initiated contact tracing for tuberculosis compared with a control intervention. Four of six RCTs and quasi-RCTs comparing contact tracing for tuberculosis to passive case finding or facility-based screening found an association between contact tracing and an increase in case detection or decrease in incidence (when tracing was coupled with treatment for contacts with active disease and prophylaxis for contacts with latent infection); whereas, the other two RCTs did not observe a positive effect on outcomes of interest ( table 2 ). Among 11 observational studies comparing tracing programmes with control interventions, eight (72·7%) found an increase in tuberculosis case detection, one (9·1%) identified an increase in cases averted, one (9·1%) found a decrease in incidence, and one (9·1%) found fewer cases detected with provider-initiated tracing than with patient-initiated tracing ( table 2 ). Among these 17 studies overall, tracing for tuberculosis led to improved outcomes in lower-burden settings (three of three) and high-burden settings (11 [78·6%] of 14 studies); and in low-income countries (six of six) and countries in other income categories (eight [72·7%] of 11 studies; table 2 , appendix pp 9–10 ). The largest study in scale examined annual data from 2007 to 2010 for reported tuberculosis cases across Mexico, finding that each unit increase in the mean number of contacts traced per patient was associated with a 33·0% decrease in national incidence ( r 2 =–0·47, p=0·010).
Three studies compared programmatic adaptations within provider-initiated contact tracing for tuberculosis ( table 2 ). A cluster RCT in Uganda found no difference in the odds of tuberculosis diagnosis among household contacts when sputum was collected at home (intervention group) versus when contacts were referred to clinics for sputum collection (odds ratio 1·34 [95% CI 0·42–4·24], p=0·62), with the authors noting that only 35 (38·5%) of 91 eligible contacts in the intervention group could produce sputum samples at home. Two observational studies evaluated expansions to existing tuberculosis tracing: one study in Portugal found that tracing household and workplace contacts prevented more cases than tracing only named contacts, and the other study in Pakistan found that screening neighbours increased case detection by 7·9% compared with household contact tracing alone.
Eight studies examined the effect of contact tracing programmes for HIV, enrolling a total of 15 439 index patients ( appendix pp 11–14 ). Five RCTs, two from Malawi and one each from China, Kenya, and the USA, found that provider-initiated contact tracing was associated with higher HIV case detection rates compared with patient-initiated contact tracing. However, the study in China could not separate the effect of provider-initiated tracing from patient-initiated tracing with self-testing kits. Among the observational studies, a pre–post study from Botswana found that offering provider-initiated contact tracing and other services to index patients did not increase the number of partners diagnosed with HIV per index patient compared with patient-initiated tracing (0·14 vs 0·13, p=0·50). Two cohort studies from the USA evaluated adaptations to HIV contact tracing programmes. Malave and colleagues showed that contact tracing by disease intervention specialists (DIS) versus community clinicians led to similar rates of new HIV diagnoses among tested partners (20 [27·0%] of 74 partners tested and 10 [22·2%] of 45, p=0·56), although DIS intervention elicited significantly more partners per index patient (0·87 vs 0·22, p<0·01). Udeagu and colleagues reported a reduced HIV case detection rate with provider-initiated tracing by mobile phone text message (five [1·5%] cases among 325 contacts) or email (three [1·1%] among 267), compared with traditional methods (telephone or in-person; 106 [5·3%] among 2009).
12 studies examined provider-initiated contact tracing for curable STIs, which included 2383 index patients for syphilis, 45 228 for gonorrhea, 484 for trichomoniasis, 862 for chlamydia, and 1446 for non-specified STIs ( appendix pp 15–19 ). Five RCTs or quasi-RCTs compared provider-initiated contact tracing with control interventions. Two RCTs, one on chlamydia in the USA and one on syndromic STIs in Zambia, found that provider-initiated tracing for male patients led to an increase in the number of treated partners (as a proxy for forward transmission); however, the Zambian study did not specify how many participants chose provider-initiated contact tracing versus an alternative referral slip (patient-initiated) intervention within the overall intervention group, and the US study did not assess how many partners in the control group received care elsewhere (and was therefore rated at high risk of bias). Two other RCTs and one quasi-RCT did not find evidence in favour of provider-initiated contact tracing for STIs, although one study noted a potentially underpowered analysis due to low trichomoniasis reinfection rates. Among the five observational studies comparing provider-initiated contact tracing with other interventions, four on gonorrhoea or syphilis found that provider-initiated tracing was associated with improvements in one or more of our outcomes of interest. The remaining observational study on chlamydia found significantly fewer partners completed treatment after provider-initiated tracing by DIS compared with a patient-initiated approach. In addition, two studies examined the effect of programmatic adaptations within provider-initiated contact tracing interventions: an RCT detected no difference in syphilis case detection between immediate provider referral compared with contract referral (but was assessed to have high risk of bias due to absence of randomisation concealment and deviations in administered interventions; appendix p 8 ), and an observational study found the proportion of syphilis patients with at least one partner treated increased from 26% to 28% (8% relative increase) when tracing by email was added to traditional in-person or telephone contact.
The single observational study for measles took place in the USA during a measles outbreak in 2017. It assessed contact tracing plus recommendation to isolate if symptoms develop, compared with contact tracing plus exclusion, in which measles-exposed individuals were recommended to be temporarily excluded from high-risk settings and to avoid public places, public transportation, and home visitors ( appendix p 11 ). The Rt for non-excluded individuals was 1·61 (95% CI 1·00–2·69) compared with 0·38 (0·20–0·73) for excluded individuals, for a relative transmissibility (unadjusted ratio of Rt values) of 4·2 (95% CI 1·9–9·6).

Section: Discussion

We identified 47 empirical studies that either evaluated the effectiveness of provider-initiated contact tracing or compared programmatic adaptations within contact tracing interventions, including six studies focused on COVID-19. Among the studies were a wide range of tracing strategies (including phone calls, text messaging, and household contact tracing ) and personnel involved with the contact tracing (ranging from public health specialists to volunteers ), highlighting the diversity of programmatic approaches often taken.
Overall, provider-initiated contact tracing was generally associated with improved control of communicable illnesses: 29 (72·5%) of 40 studies evaluating the effect of provider-initiated contact tracing, including four (66·7%) of six observational studies on COVID-19 and 11 (68·8%) of 16 RCTs and quasi-RCTs on other diseases, reported increased case detection, decreased forward transmission, or decreased disease incidence compared with control interventions. Tracing was associated with improved outcomes across pathogens with diverse transmission dynamics and across a variety of settings. However, our ability to use these observations to form precise estimates on the effectiveness of contact tracing in disease control is limited largely by the heterogeneity of approaches and also by a relative scarcity of RCT data. Most studies (29 [61·7%] of 47) used observational designs with inherent vulnerability to confounding and other biases.
Among studies of contact tracing for COVID-19, four of six studies reported notable reductions in cases, R 0 , or Rt after provider-initiated contact tracing efforts, suggesting that such programmes can have effectiveness in mitigating disease spread. However, these studies were almost exclusively in high-resource settings and used observational designs with differing programme approaches, limiting generalisability. Most studies took place during a dynamic public health situation; as such, fluctuations in COVID-19 transmission and other externalities might have reduced accuracy in estimations of tracing effectiveness. These six studies do not capture how tracing speed or completeness influence success, and such parameters are likely to be important for disease control when pre-symptomatic onward transmission occurs. The studies also do not quantify how tracing feasibility and effectiveness might change as cases exceed a contact tracing workforce or laboratory testing capacity.
Most studies of provider-initiated contact tracing for diseases other than COVID-19 similarly reported improvements in our outcomes of interest, suggesting some benefit in disease control. The repeatedly reported effectiveness of tracing interventions for tuberculosis, including in low-resource, high-burden settings, was notable. However, these studies similarly examined many distinct tracing interventions and largely relied on observational methods, once again preventing a summary effectiveness measure.
Of note, two studies found that provider-initiated contact tracing resulted in lower case detection or fewer partners completing treatment than patient-initiated tracing. Although inconsistent with most other identified studies, these findings suggest that in particular contexts, well designed, patient-initiated methods might be preferable to provider-initiated approaches. These results might alternatively reflect difficulties in connecting provider-traced contacts to follow-up services in these studies.
As a result, although contact tracing is shown to be an effective public health tool, additional evidence is needed to inform how, where, and when to deploy this tool most effectively for maximum effect in disease control, including against COVID-19. When feasible, further comparative evaluations, such as randomised, pragmatic trials within existing tracing systems, should be undertaken to evaluate different tracing interventions in real life and identify potential adaptations for unique infections and contexts.
In the interim, specific lessons learned from these studies, including those in which provider-initiated contact tracing was not shown to reduce disease spread or appeared to worsen outcomes, can inform elements of tracing programmes for COVID-19 and other diseases. Davis and colleagues concluded that low rates of home-based contact tracing for tuberculosis might have related to limited experience among community health workers in collecting sputum and a hesitation among contacts to expectorate in public, highlighting the importance of sufficient training for tracers and privacy for contacts. Two studies (Udeagu et al and Ehlman et al ) showed that contact tracing via email or text message had less success than traditional contract tracing, but nevertheless increased case detection or the number of index patients with at least one partner receiving treatment when added to traditional contact tracing, highlighting how technology might increase tracing impact. Notably, two UK studies found widespread use of a smartphone-based proximity detection and exposure notification application was associated with substantial reductions in COVID-19 cases and R 0 , although these studies were unable to fully isolate the effects of digital contact tracing from simultaneous traditional contact tracing and other interventions.
Strengths of this review include its consideration of multiple geographic regions and socioeconomic contexts across the included studies. Limitations include the predominance of observational studies, incomplete reporting in some studies, and the possibility of publication bias. We aimed to better understand how contact tracing would apply to the COVID-19 pandemic, but the unique characteristics of COVID-19, including frequent presymptomatic transmission and a relatively short serial interval, limit the generalisability of evidence from other diseases. Our study focused on disease control and did not evaluate other important outcomes of contact tracing such as how it helps understanding of disease dynamics or its ability to serve as an entry point to the health system for those at risk of disease. Further research should evaluate which patient groups (such as individuals experiencing homelessness or marginalised or minoritised communities) might differentially be excluded from or could be engaged by tracing programmes; how tracing might be affected by local values or customs, or by the accuracy and privacy of digital tools; and how the cost and cost-effectiveness of tracing programmes compare with alternative interventions.
Our review confirms a premise for contact tracing as an effective public health tool for infectious disease control, however we found little empirical data to inform best practices for contact tracing, revealing an opportunity to further evaluate this common practice relative to other public health strategies. As health agencies continue their responses against COVID-19 while responding to other ongoing health threats and planning for future pandemics, addressing these knowledge gaps through additional studies or analyses of current tracing programmes is crucial to inform on the role of contact tracing in protecting the health of communities.

Section: Data sharing

All data are available in this Article and in the appendix .

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (grant number T32 AI007433 to JJ), the Massachusetts General Hospital Executive Committee on Research (Fund for Medical Discovery Fellowship; to JJ), and the Sullivan Family Foundation (to LCI).

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (498.14 KB) Supplementary appendix
