Title: Intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment in South Australia, 1986–2017: a retrospective cohort study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

The extent of intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment is unclear due to methodological limitations in previous studies. In this study, we aimed to examine factors associated with intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment and quantify its extent in a population sample over a 30-year period in South Australia.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this retrospective cohort study, we used linked administrative data from the South Australian Birth Registry to identify dyads of mothers and their children both born in South Australia between July 1, 1986, and June 30, 2017. Three child protection system (CPS) outcomes (any CPS involvement, substantiated maltreatment, and time spent in out-of-home care) were computed from data obtained from the South Australian Department for Child Protection. Multivariable Cox regression models were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) for child CPS outcomes according to their mother's CPS exposure.

Abstract_Section: Findings

38 556 unique mother–child dyads were included. 458 (2·0%) of 23 437 children whose mothers had no CPS involvement in childhood had a substantiated report of maltreatment and 127 (0·5%) spent time in out-of-home care. By comparison, 970 (22·1%) of 4382 children whose mothers experienced substantiated maltreatment in childhood had substantiated maltreatment and 469 (10·7%) spent time in out-of-home care. After adjusting for potential confounders, children of mothers with any CPS involvement in childhood had an increased risk of CPS contact compared with children whose mothers had no CPS involvement; this risk was greatest for children of mothers who had both substantiated maltreatment and spent time in out-of-home care (HR 6·25 [95% CI 5·59–6·98] for any CPS involvement, 13·69 [10·08–16·92] for substantiated maltreatment, and 25·78 [18·23–36·45] for any time in out-of-home care). Risks of child CPS outcomes were substantially increased for children of mothers who had a first CPS notification under the age of 1 year or who had any CPS notification at age 13–17 years.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

Children are at high risk of maltreatment if their mother experienced maltreatment as a child. Assisting survivors of childhood maltreatment, particularly female survivors, provides a crucial intervention opportunity to help prevent further child abuse and neglect.

Abstract_Section: Funding

Australian National Health and Medical Research Council; Channel 7 Children's Research Foundation.

Section: Introduction

Child maltreatment is a major public health problem worldwide. As many as one-quarter of the world's population are estimated to have been physically abused as a child and more than one-third emotionally abused. Although there are appreciable differences in the reported prevalence of child maltreatment across countries and studies, children are universally acknowledged to be a uniquely vulnerable population who need protection from abuse or neglect, whether by parents or other adult perpetrators.
The many adverse social, behavioural, mental, and physical health consequences of child maltreatment can persist into adulthood, including unplanned pregnancies, unemployment and welfare dependency, violence and criminal activity, suicide, and homelessness. Child maltreatment can also have long-term relational effects, which can hinder an individual's subsequent capacity to adequately care for their own children. A history of maltreatment is one of the most prominent risk factors for perpetration of maltreatment; this is known as intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment.
Many studies have found that people who were maltreated as children are more likely to abuse or neglect their own children; however, rigorous quantitative evidence for intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment is insufficient to allow for conclusions regarding the strength of the association. A widely cited systematic review concluded that most studies that support the intergenerational hypothesis have weak study designs and cannot provide a definitive confirmation of this association. A systematic review published in 2020 by Greene and colleagues investigated associations between a parent's reported childhood maltreatment and their subsequent parenting behaviours. This study showed intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment, but whether the maltreatment reached serious concern thresholds is difficult to establish for many of the included studies and the heavy reliance on self-reporting in adulthood is problematic.

To date, only four studies have used population-based cohort designs to rigorously study the extent of intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment. However, perpetration of maltreatment by the parent was not confirmed in two of these studies and one study used parental self-reporting of their own and their child's history of maltreatment, which is subject to recall and reporting bias. Only one study used administrative records of substantiated maltreatment from a population sample, finding a two-times risk of child maltreatment for individuals whose mothers had been the subject of unsubstantiated maltreatment reports in childhood, and a three-times risk for individuals whose mothers had experienced substantiated child maltreatment. However, this study measured second-generation maltreatment only up to age 5 years and did not report on mothers older than 19 years, which restricts the generalisability of the findings. Additionally, maternal history of maltreatment was based only on reports occurring after the mother's tenth birthday, further restricting generalisability through censoring of maltreatment exposure.
Robust and methodologically adequate assessments of the intergenerational hypothesis are needed to inform prevention and intervention efforts. Although administrative records might not capture all instances of child maltreatment in the population, they ensure a consistent threshold of risk or harm and overcome some of the limitations of survey data, including social acceptability bias, the inability of participants to recall events that might have occurred in early childhood, sample bias through low representation of people with the most serious child maltreatment exposure, and inappropriate thresholds for defining maltreatment.
In this study, we aimed to determine the extent of intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment by analysing associations between mother and child involvement with the child protection system (CPS) in a large population-based cohort in South Australia. We hypothesised that a mother's history of child maltreatment would be associated with increased risk of CPS outcomes for their child.

Section: Methods

In this retrospective cohort study, mother–child dyads were identified from a record of all births in South Australia, Australia, between July 1, 1986, and June 30, 2017 (the date of last available CPS data). To obtain information on both mothers and their children, we selected dyads that included mothers who were a part of this birth cohort and who also had live-born children during the study period. Both mothers and their children were followed up from birth.
These analyses form part of the Impacts of Child Abuse and Neglect (iCAN) study. Ethical approval for the iCAN study was obtained from the South Australian Health Human Research Ethics Committee (reference HREC14SAH28), and University of South Australia Human Research Ethics Committee (reference 000032801).
We used linked administrative data from the South Australian Births Registry, Perinatal Statistics Collection, Department for Child Protection, and hospital inpatient and emergency department datasets ( appendix p 1 ). Data linkage of mother–child dyads was done by SA-NT DataLink . Data were linked using a combination of probabilistic algorithms and clerical review, incorporating information from more than 50 sources to identify unique individuals. Privacy was maintained using the well established separation principle, in which approved researchers are only provided access to de-identified data.
There were three main outcome variables for assessing second-generation child maltreatment: any CPS involvement (yes or no), any substantiated maltreatment (yes or no), and any placement in out-of-home care (yes or no). Second-generation child CPS involvement was based on data from the Department of Child Protection and contained records of all children receiving notifications, investigations, and substantiations of maltreatment, in addition to out-of-home care placements. Further details regarding CPS in South Australia, including the legislative definition of child maltreatment, are available in the appendix (pp 2–3 ). Information on new placements into out-of-home care was available from Jan 1, 1990, to June 30, 2017, and information was also available on the start dates of placements that were active as of Jan 1, 1990.
Mother's CPS involvement was defined by categories used by the Department for Child Protection, detailed elsewhere, and covered the period from birth to age 18 years (or up to June 30, 2017, for mothers not yet aged 18 years). The eight categories of CPS involvement correspond to increasing likelihood of risk or harm: no CPS involvement; notifier-only concern (a notification deemed insufficient or vague, lacking credibility, or failing to meet definitional thresholds); other notification (a notification that meets the definitional threshold for child maltreatment but is not investigated because the event is historical, is being dealt with elsewhere, relates to an adolescent at risk, or the alleged perpetrator is not the child's parent or carer); child protection matter (a notification that meets the definition for familial maltreatment but is not investigated by the CPS); investigation only (a notification that meets definitional thresholds and is investigated by the Department for Child Protection but is not substantiated); substantiated maltreatment but no time in out-of-home care; out-of-home care but no substantiation of maltreatment; and substantiated maltreatment with time in out-of-home care ( appendix p 4 ).
Predictor variables related to the children included: sex, whether the child was still in hospital more than 28 days following birth, and whether the child was born with a congenital condition.
Area-based socioeconomic status of the mother at birth, a potential confounder, was determined using the Index of Relative Socio-economic Disadvantage, which is based on a weighted combination of variables (eg, income, educational attainment, and employment) from the Australian Census, and categorised by quintiles, with quintile 5 being the least disadvantaged and quintile 1 the most disadvantaged.
For each dyad, the mother's age at the time of her child's birth was taken from the birth registry and categorised as age younger than 20 years, age 20–24 years, or age 25 years or older. The number of children per mother was calculated from a count of all second-generation children matched to unique mothers, measured up to June 30, 2017. Counts were recoded into four categories: one child, two to three children, four to five children, and six or more children.
Data on disability of the mother were obtained from Department for Education yearly Census records, as completed by parents. A disability was recorded if there was any Census record in any school year showing that the person had autism spectrum disorder, a language or communication disorder, global development delay, hearing disability, intellectual disability, physical disability, speech or language disability, or vision disability.
Self-reported smoking status was obtained from the Perinatal Statistics Collection. Mothers who reported being a smoker at first visit or who reported smoking any number of cigarettes during the second half of pregnancy were categorised as smoking (any amount), whereas all other mothers were categorised as non-smokers or unknown.
Employment status of the mother at the time of the child's birth was taken from the birth registry, which is based on occupation information reported by the mother. Any occupation with paid employment was categorised as employed and any reported occupation that was not paid (eg, unemployed, home duties, pensioner, student) was categorised as not employed. The employment status of individuals with missing data on employment were categorised as unknown.
Marital status of the mother at the time of the child's birth was based on perinatal data and recoded as married or de facto relationship, not partnered, or unknown or missing. When no information was available, a marriage date recorded on the child's birth registry record was used to infer that the mother was married.
Admission of the mother to hospital for a mental health condition or substance use was identified from an emergency department presentation grouped under a major diagnostic category relating to alcohol or drug misuse, alcohol-induced or drug-induced mental disorders, or psychiatric illness, or an inpatient hospital visit relating to mental diseases or disorders, alcohol or drug use, or alcohol-induced or drug-induced organic mental disorders.
Cumulative incidence curves were plotted to describe the association between a mother's CPS involvement and that of her children. The cumulative probability of children having a CPS event at time t was calculated as the percentage of children with the event of interest by time t (measured from birth), multiplied by the probabilities of having the event at all time intervals preceding that time, reported separately for the eight mother CPS categories. Because no second-generation children reached age 18 years during the study period, measurement was censored at the end of data coverage (June 30, 2017) or, if applicable, the date of the child's death.
Because of the varying exposure (age) of second-generation children, univariable and multivariable Cox regression modelled time to the three child CPS outcomes: first CPS notification, the notification attached to the first substantiation, and first entry into out-of-home-care. The proportional hazards assumption was tested using a Wald test and Schoenfeld residual plots.
We used two multivariable model specifications. In both, adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% CIs were estimated between child CPS outcomes and their mother's CPS exposure and other explanatory variables. Model 1 included mother's CPS exposure, decade of birth, area-based socioeconomic status at birth, disability status, and child's sex and congenital birth conditions. We considered this model to provide the best estimate of the effect of a mother's CPS exposure on the maltreatment of their child, adjusting for confounders. Model 2 included the variables used in model 1 and several attributes that we hypothesised to lie on the causal pathway between mother and child CPS involvement, mediating associations with child CPS outcomes. These mediating variables are potential consequences of the mother's maltreatment history (mother's mental health, number of children, age at child's birth, marital status, smoking status, employment status, child in hospital >28 days following birth). Model 2 can, therefore, be viewed as an explanatory model.
Because we were interested in how the timing of CPS involvement might affect intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment we did an additional subset Cox regression analysis of the association between the mother's age at first CPS notification and the risk of the child having CPS outcomes, and the association between the mother having a CPS notification during the teenage years (age 13–17 years) on the child's CPS outcomes.
To adjust for the clustering of multiple children with the same mother, SEs were adjusted using the Taylor series linearisation approach, using SPSS Complex Samples procedures in SPSS (version 26.0).
Missing data were addressed by pairwise deletion or by including a category of missing or unknown for some variables where this was considered potentially meaningful (not at random).
The funders of the study had no role in the study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

621 496 children were born in South Australia between July 1, 1986, and June 30, 2017, of whom 299 325 were female. 22 789 (7·6%) of these girls went on to have at least one live-born child in South Australia by the study end-date, with 12 166 (53·4%) of them having had more than one child. This resulted in 38 556 unique mother–child dyads for analysis. As of June 30, 2017, children had a mean age of 4·2 years (SD 3·2 years), and a median age of 3·5 years (IQR 4·6 years).
8358 (36·7%) of the 22 789 mothers had some CPS involvement during childhood, 2293 (10·1%) had substantiated maltreatment, and 1070 (4·7%) had spent some time in out-of-home care. The percentage of mothers in mother–child dyads with CPS contact was slightly higher than this ( table 1 ), as mothers with CPS contact had on average more children.
19 478 (83·1%) of 23 437 children whose mothers had no CPS involvement also had no CPS involvement, 3488 (14·9%) had a CPS notification that was not substantiated, 458 (2·0%) had a substantiated report, and 127 (0·5%) spent time in out-of-home care ( appendix p 5 ). 1632 (37·2%) of 4382 children whose mothers experienced substantiated maltreatment had no CPS involvement, 1748 (39·9%) had a CPS notification that was not substantiated, 970 (22·1%) had substantiated maltreatment, and 469 (10·7%) spent time in out-of-home care ( appendix p 6 ). 638 (30·4%) of 2096 children whose mothers spent time in out-of-home care had no CPS involvement, 859 (41·0%) had a CPS notification that was not substantiated, 574 (27·4%) had a substantiated report, and 326 (15·6%) spent time in out-of-home care ( appendix p 6 ).
The cumulative incidence of child CPS outcomes stratified by mother's CPS involvement is presented in the appendix (pp 7–9 ). CPS system involvement for children of mothers with substantiated maltreatment was highly prevalent, with some CPS contact in 63% of these children by study end and approximately 84% modelled to age 13 years. Substantial differences between subgroups defined by mother's CPS involvement were seen for all child CPS outcomes by the time children were aged 1 year. These differences increased across early and middle childhood for children with substantiated maltreatment or who had spent time in out-of-home care.
Mothers with CPS involvement indicative of high risk of serious harm tended to be younger (<20 years) at the time the child was born, greater number of children, and lower area-based socioeconomic status, and were more likely to smoke, be unpartnered, be unemployed, have a disability, and have hospital admissions for mental health conditions or substance use than those with lower levels of CPS involvement ( table 1 ).
In univariate analyses, significant associations were found between mother's CPS exposure and child CPS outcomes. HRs for child CPS outcomes increased across categories of mother's CPS exposure, with the strongest association seen for children of mothers with a substantiated report of maltreatment and time spent in out-of-home care ( table 2 ).
In all adjusted models, consistent and strong associations were found between mother's CPS involvement and child CPS outcomes. Using no maternal CPS involvement as the reference category, the strongest association in model 1 was found for children of mothers who had substantiated maltreatment and time in out-of-home care (HR 6·25 [95% CI 5·59–6·98] for the child having any CPS involvement, 13·69 [10·08–16·92] for substantiated maltreatment, and 25·78 [18·23–36·45] for spending any time in out-of-home care; table 3 ). Effect sizes were attenuated but remained significant in model 2, after adjusting for potential mediating variables ( table 3 ).
Differences in risk were seen across mother CPS exposure categories ( table 3 ). After controlling for a wide range of child and mother-related variables in model 2, children of mothers with notifications classed as notifier-only concern, who did not receive further investigation, were at increased risk of any CPS involvement (adjusted HR 2·47, 95% CI 2·23–2·72), substantiated maltreatment (3·24, 2·50–4·20), and time in out-of-home care (5·23, 3·38–8·09).
The risk of CPS outcomes was substantially increased for the children of mothers who had their first CPS notification before age 1 year compared with the children of mothers who had CPS notifications later in childhood ( figure 1 ). Additionally, children had an approximately 2–3 times increased risk of CPS outcomes if their mothers had a CPS notification aged 13–17 years compared with the children of mothers with a CPS notification earlier in childhood ( figure 2 ).

Section: Discussion

This study found a strong association between the CPS involvement of mothers and their children, supporting the hypothesis that child maltreatment has a substantial intergenerational component. This finding is consistent with the well described pathways between child maltreatment and disrupted brain development and disturbed relational patterning, which can result in deeply embedded behaviours and emotional responses that undermine nurturing parenting, even with a strong desire to do better.
Children of mothers with a history of both substantiated maltreatment and out-of-home care had 6·3 times the risk of any CPS involvement, 13·7 times the risk of substantiated maltreatment, and 25·8 times the risk of having time in out-of-home care, compared with children of mothers with no CPS involvement. Adjusted associations are appreciably larger than those reported in other large cohort studies and systematic reviews.
HRs were attenuated after adjusting for child and mother-related factors, but remained large and statistically significant. The fully adjusted analysis (model 2) and results of other published studies should be interpreted with caution. Many commonly used covariates, such as maternal age at child's birth, maternal education, history of mental illness, substance use, and employment status are also consequences of child maltreatment. They are not confounders, but rather explanatory variables on the intergenerational transmission pathway. For estimation of total causal effects, it is unnecessary and probably harmful to adjust for a variable on a causal pathway from exposure to outcome, or for a descending proxy. Thus, the adjusted HR derived from multivariable models will over-adjust and understate the full contribution of maternal maltreatment to child outcomes. The adjusted HRs in model 1 describe the observed associations, adjusted for true confounders, and also highlight which mothers and children are at greatest risk and where to target preventive interventions. The high observed intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment partly reflects the additional adversities experienced by mothers with child maltreatment exposure, which are part of the child maltreatment pathway.
Among mothers with some historical CPS involvement, earlier age at first notification was associated with increased risk of their child having CPS outcomes. There has been growing focus on the early identification of child maltreatment, with early intervention seen as a way of reducing the negative effect of abuse and neglect on the child. However, our finding that mothers who were the subject of earlier initial CPS notifications had increased risks of having children with CPS involvement suggests that, for many children, early identification has not translated into improved long-term outcomes. Early identification can only work when remedial actions are implemented and effective; however, we did not have data on intervention services or programmes delivered, and future work is warranted.
Our study also found that mothers who had a CPS notification in their teenage years were at increased risk of having a child with CPS contact. Given the early age of childbirth of many women with a history of child maltreatment, the teenage years might be a crucial period for future outcomes. Ongoing abuse or neglect during this period is likely to cause numerous social and interpersonal issues, potentially resulting in compromised or abusive parenting of their own children.
Although some studies report little difference in outcomes by substantiated and non-substantiated notifications there is growing evidence that CPS exposure types can reliably differentiate between outcomes. We found differences in child maltreatment not only between the children of mothers with substantiated maltreatment and those with unsubstantiated maltreatment, but also between mothers with notifier-only concern notifications and those with no CPS contact. Therefore, although CPS exposure types were important risk predictors in this study, our findings support that even unsubstantiated reports represent increased risk of intergenerational child maltreatment.
This study strengthens and builds on the findings of previous studies on intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment in several ways. First, the use of high-quality population-level linked administrative data generates a large cohort for analysis for long-term follow-up. Second, administrative data are able to overcome some of the limitations of survey-based studies, notably recall bias (uncertain recall of events in early childhood), social acceptability bias, and selection bias. Third, detailed information about CPS contact of mothers and their children from birth allowed a granular analysis of child maltreatment exposure, based on agency-assessed risk of harms. The dose–response relationship observed highlights the need for the diversity of child maltreatment exposure to be incorporated into analysis plans. Fourth, we included several social determinants and potential risk factors as explanatory and mediating variables, adding information that could be useful for targeted interventions. Finally, appropriate statistical methods were used to model varying follow-up periods and to account for different lengths of observation.
Our study also has limitations. Unfortunately, no data were available on the perpetrators of maltreatment. Our study measured whether a child whose mother had a history of maltreatment as a child was more likely to be considered at risk of serious harm. We did not ascertain the family circumstances that resulted in CPS contact, which can be extremely complex, often involving domestic violence, substance misuse, poverty, mental illness, and behaviours that reflect the effects of a history of parental trauma. Therefore, our study does not ascribe child maltreatment to the mother but highlights the need to provide support to women with a history of maltreatment, to ensure that their children are safe.
Information on the child maltreatment status of fathers was also missing. The father's co-parenting contribution, presence in the family home, and added economic contribution can be protective against child maltreatment. However, patterns and types of abuse differ between men and women, and men are generally disproportionately implicated as perpetrators of physical child abuse compared with women. Although a mother's history of maltreatment as a child has a larger predictive value for subsequent maltreatment of their child compared with the father's history, and mothers have been found to more commonly be the perpetrator of child maltreatment, information on both parents would have allowed us to better describe the full extent of the association between parental CPS involvement and that of their children.
Despite people of Indigenous descent being overrepresented in CPS in Australia, we were unable to report on Indigenous status because we did not have the necessary ethics permissions to do so. Data on household income and the severity of harm of maltreatment were also not available, although all substantiated cases were required to meet a threshold for substantial harm or risk as established under State legislation ( appendix pp 2–3 ).
Regarding attrition, women in our birth cohort who had children outside South Australia within the study timeframe were not included in our study. Unfortunately, we are unable to identify this group, nor is it possible to ascertain what, if any, bias this has introduced into our estimates. Nonetheless, our study provides an accurate reflection of the intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment for the cohort of women born in South Australia who had children within the state during our study timeframe.
Some child CPS involvement might be the result of surveillance bias associated with known maltreatment of the mother, which could increase the apparent intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment. Although such bias is possible, we are not aware of studies in South Australia that have tested this hypothesis. Most notifications to the Department for Child Protection in South Australia are from groups who are unlikely to know the mother's own maltreatment history, such as police, schools, and health workers; as such, although surveillance bias cannot be excluded, it is unlikely to affect our results.
Similar to other studies, we were also unable to distinguish the effect of child maltreatment exposure from that of CPS contact. Other research has found that earlier child removal in the presence of a higher percentage of life in out-of-home care can reduce harmful outcomes. Given the added risk for mothers who have been previously placed into out-of-home care, there is an imperative to investigate the benefits and risks of the long-term mental and emotional health of those placed in care. Although children are placed in out-of-home care for their immediate safety, there is a clear obligation to support these children and provide them with access to resources that will assist them in overcoming the trauma of past abuse and to manage the new issues of a non-familial residence. The effect of age of entry to care, maintaining connections with birth family, and the potential for reunification should be investigated further. Future research is also needed on how out-of-home care affects intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment, although this is associated with methodological challenges such as the conflation of spending time in out-of-home care with the seriousness of abuse or familial issues that leads to removal into care.
The strength of associations found in our study support a call to action for the protection of children. The risk to second-generation children should be assessed by protection agencies, clinicians, and providers of intensive family support services to appropriately manage cases where there is evidence of past or current maltreatment of the parent or child. Improved comprehensive support is needed for mothers (and probably fathers) who are known to have been previously maltreated and for their children, so that the cycle of intergenerational child maltreatment is disrupted. Evidence-based theory-driven programmes should be made freely available to all people with exposure to child maltreatment, together with upskilling of the clinical and human services workforce to appropriately identify child maltreatment and work with children and their families. Administrative data could be used to identify and support people who have been maltreated in the past, so that they can offer the nurturing parenting that their children need to thrive. Furthermore, identifying at-risk subgroups in terms of exposure type or demographics can help to target interventions and needs to be researched further. Finally, from an economic standpoint, intergenerational risks also increase the cost-effectiveness and value of intervention and mitigation of maltreatment, when health and economic burdens compound over multiple generations.
This study found that the excess risk of child maltreatment associated with a mother's CPS involvement is substantial and higher than previously reported, providing a clear opportunity to disrupt the intergenerational pathway of child maltreatment. Knowledge of a parent's history of maltreatment and circumstances provides valuable and powerful information that can help to reduce their children's risk of abuse or neglect. However, interventions with effective trauma-based programmes for children and families are needed, ideally early in life, before sequalae (such as poor performance at school, risky behaviours, mental illness, and teenage pregnancy) emerge. Several maternal factors could represent intervention targets, including young maternal age at childbirth, high number of children in the family, mental illness, substance use, and unemployment. The challenge is for the clinical community and the wider society to break the cycle of intergenerational transmission of child maltreatment, the payoffs of which could be substantial.

Section: Declaration of interests

We declare no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

This study was funded by a grant from the Channel 7 Children's Research Foundation and is part of the Impacts of Child Abuse and Neglect (iCAN) study. The iCAN study was funded by a project grant from the National Health and Medical Research Council (number 1103439). We acknowledge the South Australian families and children whose de-identified historic administrative data were used in this linked-data analysis. We also acknowledge SA-NT DataLink integration authority and the technical team for generating unique identifiers, which enabled the provision of de-identified linkable data for the study. We thank the data custodians and officers from the South Australian Government Agencies whose support for this study, through the provision of data and advice, has made the research possible, foremost of which is the South Australian Department for Child Protection.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (530.55 KB) Supplementary appendix
