Title: Effectiveness of permanent supportive housing and income assistance interventions for homeless individuals in high-income countries: a systematic review


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Permanent supportive housing and income assistance are valuable interventions for homeless individuals. Homelessness can reduce physical and social wellbeing, presenting public health risks for infectious diseases, disability, and death. We did a systematic review, meta-analysis, and narrative synthesis to investigate the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of permanent supportive housing and income interventions on the health and social wellbeing of individuals who are homeless in high-income countries.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We searched MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Epistemonikos, NIHR-HTA, NHS EED, DARE, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials from database inception to Feb 10, 2020, for studies on permanent supportive housing and income interventions for homeless populations. We included only randomised controlled trials, quasi-experimental studies, and cost-effectiveness studies from high-income countries that reported at least one outcome of interest (housing stability, mental health, quality of life, substance use, hospital admission, earned income, or employment). We screened studies using a standardised data collection form and pooled data from published studies. We synthesised results using random effects meta-analysis and narrative synthesis. We assessed certainty of the evidence using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach.

Abstract_Section: Findings

Our search identified 15 908 citations, of which 72 articles were included for analysis (15 studies on permanent supportive housing across 41 publications, ten studies on income interventions across 15 publications, and 21 publications on cost or cost-effectiveness). Permanent supportive housing interventions increased long-term (6 year) housing stability for participants with moderate support needs (one study; rate ratio [RR] 1·13 [95% CI 1·01–1·26]) and high support needs (RR 1·42 [1·19–1·69]) when compared with usual care. Permanent supportive housing had no measurable effect on the severity of psychiatric symptoms (ten studies), substance use (nine studies), income (two studies), or employment outcomes (one study) when compared with usual social services. Income interventions, particularly housing subsidies with case management, showed long-term improvements in the number of days stably housed (one study; mean difference at 3 years between intervention and usual services 8·58 days; p<0·004), whereas the effects on mental health and employment outcomes were unclear.

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

Permanent supportive housing and income assistance interventions were effective in reducing homelessness and achieving housing stability. Future research should focus on the long-term effects of housing and income interventions on physical and mental health, substance use, and quality-of-life outcomes.

Abstract_Section: Funding

Inner City Health Associates.

Section: Introduction

Despite advances in public health and social welfare, the number of individuals who are homeless has continued to increase in most high-income countries ( appendix p 1 ). Acquiring or maintaining permanent supportive housing and a stable income can be life-changing for homeless individuals. Compared with the general population, people who are homeless have higher all-cause mortality and higher prevalence of multiple morbidities, infectious diseases, and disabilities.
In the past 20 years, many interventions have emerged to help homeless individuals to obtain and maintain stable housing and incomes. Until the early 2000s, housing interventions prioritised people with mental illness symptoms and those who abstained from alcohol and substance use. However, newer interventions, such as permanent supportive housing, reversed the sequence of treatment and housing, and access to housing was not contingent on adherence to treatment or abstinence. Permanent housing has become a strategy that is often combined with coordinated case management. The absence of an adequate stable income can be a barrier to housing stability and access to social support. Interventions to increase income have been found to improve health-related quality of life in low-income individuals, and are strongly associated with disease prevalence. Income assistance interventions might include housing subsidies, financial education and empowerment, and employment support. These interventions help individuals meet essential costs of living, including housing, food, and transportation. Improved socioeconomic status might reduce costs to society by decreasing expenditure on health care, social services, and the legal system.

Stakeholders in health and social sectors, including people with experience of homelessness and policy makers, can benefit from an updated synthesis of evidence on the effectiveness of permanent supportive housing and income interventions. This review is part of a series of reviews that will be used to inform a Canadian clinical practice guideline. The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to assess the effectiveness of permanent supportive housing and income assistance on the health and social outcomes of homeless individuals.

Section: Methods

For this systematic review and meta-analysis, a health librarian developed and peer reviewed a search strategy to identify eligible studies on the effectiveness or cost-effectiveness of permanent supportive housing and income interventions to address homelessness. We systematically searched MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Epistemonikos, NIHR-HTA database, NHS EED, DARE, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials from database inception to Feb 10, 2020, without language restrictions, using the search terms “homeless”, “low income”, “marginalized”, and “vulnerable”. We only included randomised controlled trials, quasi-experimental studies, and cost-effectiveness studies done in homeless populations in high-income countries, which reported at least one outcome of interest ( appendix p 7 ). We used a combination of indexed terms, free text words, and subject headings; the full search strategy is shown in the appendix (p 9) . The electronic database searches were supplemented with manual searches of the reference lists of primary studies and systematic reviews, citations suggested by experts, grey literature, and all results were reviewed using Rayyan reference manager software. We assessed each study in duplicate and any discrepancies were resolved through discussion or by a third reviewer. We extracted summary estimates from included studies.
This systematic review was done in accordance with a peer-reviewed Campbell Collaboration protocol, and the PRISMA and SWiM reporting guidelines ( appendix p 5 ).
Our review working group, consisting of expert health professionals and individuals with experience of homelessness, used a modified Delphi consensus method to identify the most important interventions to evaluate in this systematic review. This process identified permanent housing and income assistance as priorities, therefore we included only studies of these interventions in our systematic review. The main outcomes selected by the review working group were housing stability, mental health, quality of life, substance use, hospital admission, employment, and earned income.
Two reviewers independently extracted data from the included studies using a standardised data collection form, which included study design, population characteristics and size, interventions, comparators, outcomes of interest, conclusions, and funding sources. A third reviewer resolved any discrepancies. Results from some studies were reported in multiple publications. Therefore, to prevent double counting of data, individual records were screened to identify unique studies and evaluated for potential overlap by comparing study design, enrolment and data collection dates, authors and their associated affiliations, and the reported selection and eligibility criteria. We included only unique data from each study when reviewing multiple publications. We contacted authors of included publications to obtain missing data when possible. Two independent reviewers used the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool to assess the methodological quality of included studies. We tabulated the effects of permanent supportive housing and income interventions on housing stability, mental health, quality of life, substance use, hospital admission, employment, and income outcomes for all timepoints ( appendix pp 28–50 ).
We did a meta-analysis using RevMan 5.3 software with a random-effects model. We calculated measures of effects as standardised mean differences for continuous outcomes and odds ratios for dichotomous outcomes. We used the Z score to calculate p values for the comparison of effect sizes between groups; p values of less than 0·05 were considered statistically significant. We assessed statistical hetergeneity using the I statistic. Where clinical heterogeneity (ie, different studies reporting different types of outcomes) was high between studies and thus did not allow for meta-analysis, we used narrative synthesis. We classified outcomes as short term (≤6 months), medium term (7–17 months), and long term (≥18 months). When effect estimates were reported, we did not convert to a common measure of effect. We assessed the certainty of the evidence using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) framework ( appendix p 52 ).
The funders had no role in the study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or the writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all of the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

Section: Results

Our search yielded 15 908 citations, of which 249 full-text articles were screened, and 72 met inclusion criteria and were included in our systematic review ( figure 1 ; appendix pp 11–27 ). The 72 articles included data from 15 studies (across 41 publications) on permanent supportive housing, data from ten studies (across 15 publications) on income assistance, and data from 21 publications (of which five publications were also included for the analysis of permanent supportive housing and income assistance) with cost-effectiveness data. All included studies were done in the USA or Canada. Characteristics of included studies are summarised in tables 1, 2, and 3 . We identified methodological limitations in random sequence generation, allocation concealment, and masking of participants and study personnel in most of the included studies ( appendix p 51 ). GRADE evidence profiles and certainty assessments for patient-important outcomes (ie, outcomes that patients consider most important) are presented in the appendix (pp 53–55) .
Housing stability was significantly improved by permanent supportive housing compared with usual care. In the Canadian At Home/Chez Soi (AHCS) study, 74% of participants with high support needs who received permanent supportive housing with assertive community treatment were in stable housing at 24 months compared with 41% of the high need participants in the usual services group (odds ratio [OR] 4·10; 95% CI 2·98–5·63; p<0·0001; moderate certainty evidence). Participants with moderate support needs spent a higher percentage of days stably housed than did individuals in the usual services group, although adjusted mean differences varied across the four sites (33·0% [95% CI 26·2–39·8] for site A; 49·5% [41·1– 58·0] for site B; 35·6% [29·4–41·8] for site C; and 45·3% [38·2–52·5] for site D; p<0·01 for interaction). An extension study of AHCS in Toronto (ON, Canada) showed long-term benefits over 6 years; participants who received permanent supportive housing spent more days stably housed than did those who received usual care (rate ratio [RR] of days stably housed 1·42 [95% CI 1·19–1·69] for the high needs group vs RR 1·13 [95% CI 1·01–1·26] for the moderate needs group). The magnitude of effect estimates decreased with time for both the high needs and moderate needs groups. Similar findings were observed in the US-based Pathways study, and a Canadian quasi-experimental study at 6 and 24 months. Results of a meta-analysis of data from the US Pathways and Canadian AHCS studies showed that permanent supportive housing resulted in more participants in stable housing than in usual services at 18 months or later (OR 3·58 [95% CI 2·36– 5·43]; between 211 and 386 more participants in the intervention group in stable housing than the usual group; moderate certainty evidence; figure 2 ). The benefits of permanent supportive housing were also observed among the subgroups of young people (aged 18–24 years), frequent emergency department users, and adults aged 50 years or older. Several studies compared housing models, models of care provision, and abstinence requirements ( table 1 ); housing stability outcomes for these studies are summarised in the appendix (pp 27–50) .
Ten studies assessed the effect of permanent supportive housing on mental health. All studies comparing permanent supportive housing with usual services reported no additional benefits of permanent supportive housing on mental health outcomes. Permanent supportive housing with integrated on-site case management services was associated with greater reductions in psychiatric symptoms than permanent supportive housing with parallel external assertive community treatment services. In two studies, at short-term (6 months) and long-term (24 months) follow-up, the mental health of the comparison groups had improved significantly compared with the permanent supportive housing group.
Ten studies reported the effect of permanent supportive housing on subjective quality of life across different life domains. Quality-of-life scores among permanent supportive housing participants with high service needs improved more quickly than the usual services group in the first year of follow-up and had higher mean scores at 2 years (adjusted standardised mean difference 0·15 [95% CI 0·04–0·24]; p<0·01). However, this difference decreased over time (adjusted standardised mean difference at 24 months 0·05 [95% CI −0·08 to 0·18]; p=0·43; low certainty evidence). Among participants with moderate support needs, the difference favoured permanent supportive housing at 6 months (mean change from baseline 5·91 [95% CI 3·41–8·41]; p<0·001) and at 24 months (mean change from baseline 4·37 [95% CI 1·60–7·14]; p=0·002; low certainty evidence). At 6 years, no significant differences in quality of life were observed between the groups, regardless of participants' level of need. One study showed a significant improvement in permanent supportive housing participants' satisfaction in living situations (p<0·01); however, no significant differences were identified between groups in health-related quality-of-life measures (p=0·99). A second study reported higher quality of life in the comparison group than the permanent supportive housing group (p<0·01). Single-site permanent supportive housing with integrated on-site case management support was associated with greater life satisfaction among male participants than male participants who had permanent supportive housing and access to parallel external assertive community treatment services. In contrast, female participants reported similar levels of life satisfaction for both types of housing.
The effect of permanent supportive housing on substance use was assessed in nine studies. In the AHCS study, no significant differences in substance-use related problems were identified in permanent supportive housing participants compared with usual services over 6 years (p=0·15). In another study, the proportion of permanent supportive housing participants who reported severe drug-use problems was significantly higher than those receiving usual services (mean difference 1·40 [95% CI 0·44–2·36]; p=0·004), whereas no significant differences in severe alcohol-use problems were identified between the groups (p=0·09). Permanent supportive housing was not found to have any additional benefits on substance-use outcomes in four other studies.
Data from the AHCS study showed a larger decrease in emergency department visits among high needs permanent supportive housing participants than individuals in the usual services group at 6 months (incidence rate ratio 0·68 [95% CI 0·52–0·90]; p=0·007), but not at subsequent follow-up or among moderate needs participants. In contrast, the US-based Pathways study reported that participants in the usual care group spent significantly more time in hospital than did participants in the permanent supportive housing group (p<0·01). Furthermore, one study found that permanent supportive housing participants had fewer admissions to hospital (29% reduction [95% CI −10 to −4]; p=0·005); fewer days spent in hospital (29% reduction [8 to 45]; p=0·01); and fewer emergency department visits (24% reduction [3 to 40]; p=0·03) over an 18-month period compared with usual services. In an earlier study, the permanent supportive housing group spent significantly fewer nights in hospital than did participants in the usual services group (mean difference −31 [95% CI −47·83 to −14·16]; p=0·001), however no between-group differences were identified for the number or duration of readmissions to psychiatric hospitals. In a non-randomised study, no significant differences were identified between permanent supportive housing and waitlisted groups with regard to the number of days spent in hospital (p=0·54) or the number of emergency department visits (p=0·35).
Few permanent supportive housing studies reported on earned income and employment outcomes. The AHCS study found no significant differences between participants with high or moderate support needs who received permanent supportive housing compared with those who received usual services in terms of number of days of consecutive employment, hourly wage, hours of work per week, or monthly earned income.
The cost-effectiveness studies on permanent supportive housing reported inconsistent results regarding resource requirements. Seven studies showed increased costs to the payer, and six showed that costs were partially offset by savings in medical and social services as a result of the intervention ( table 3 ). A cost utility analysis of permanent supportive housing suggested that permanent supportive housing was associated with increased costs and increased quality-adjusted life-years, with an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of US$62 493 per quality-adjusted life years. Another study concluded that, compared with usual care, permanent supportive housing was more costly to society (CAN$7868 [95% CI 4409–11 405), but increased the number of days spent stably housed (140 days [95% CI 128–153]). The cost of 1 day of stable housing was CAN$56, which might be considered to be cost-effective.
Ten studies on income assistance interventions assessed housing stability; however, heterogeneity in intervention design and outcome assessment precluded meta-analysis. Five studies investigated the impact of housing subsidies with or without case management. When compared with usual services, one study showed significant improvements in the proportion of participants living independently in stable housing (without family or friends) at 6 months (OR 6·20 [95% CI 4·18–9·20]; p<0·0001) and 18 months (4·60 [3·10–6·83]; p<0·0001). When compared with case management alone, housing subsidies and case management resulted in long-term improvements in the number of days spent stably housed (mean difference at 3 years 8·58; p<0·004; low certainty evidence), and the proportion of participants living in independent housing at 24 months (57·5% for people with housing subsidies and case management vs 30·4% for people with case management alone; OR 3·09 [95% CI 2·00–4·76]; p<0·0001). Notably, women achieved consistent housing almost 6 months earlier than men. A pilot study that offered assistance finding housing and rental supplements showed such marked improvements in attainment of independent housing at 6 months that the study was concluded and plans were made to routinely implement the intervention (100% of people given assistance vs 14·2% of people without assistance; p<0·001 Fisher's exact test). The remaining four studies assessed the effectiveness of financial education, compensated work therapy, or individual placement and support. Financial education had no additional benefit compared with existing employment-specific programming; however, compensated work therapy significantly reduced episodes of homelessness compared with usual services (OR 0·1 [95% CI 0·1–0·3]; p=0·001; low certainty evidence). Individual placement and support had an effect on housing stability when compared with usual services or social enterprise interventions.
Few studies investigated the effects of income assistance interventions on mental health, quality of life, substance use, and hospital admission outcomes: compared with usual care, housing subsidies with case management resulted in short-term improvements in depression symptoms and perceived stress levels, but had no significant effect on measures of mental health or emergency department visits. Compared with case management alone, the addition of housing subsidies significantly improved quality of life in US (mean difference 0·39; p=0·009; low certainty evidence) and Canadian studies (p=0·031). Housing subsidies without case management had no effect on alcohol or drug use. Financial education did not significantly affect depressive symptoms compared with existing employment-specific programming. Compensated work therapy immediately decreased alcohol consumption (mean difference −45·4% [SD 9·4]; p=0·001) and drug consumption (mean difference −44·7% [12·8]; p=0·001) compared with usual services, however, differences between groups declined over time.
Employment and earned income outcomes were reported in six studies. Long-term housing subsidies alone had no effect on employment or family income, but significantly improved food security compared with usual services (p<0·01). Housing subsidies with case management also resulted in improved food security when compared with usual services, but had no effect on days employed or total earned income. Financial education resulted in no significant changes in economic hardship, earnings, and employment, whereas the employment-specific programming (comparison) group had a significant increase in employment. Provision of individual placement and support alongside permanent supportive housing in the AHCS study during periods of high intervention fidelity resulted in participants being more than twice as likely to secure employment than those assigned to usual services (OR 2·42 [95% CI 1·13–5·15]; p=0·02; low certainty evidence); however, during the entire study period, this difference was not significant (p=0·46). Compared with social enterprise interventions, individual placement and support had no additional benefits on earned income or employment for young people (aged 16–24 years) who were homeless.
Two studies assessed the cost-effectiveness of income assistance interventions. Housing subsidies with case management led to higher client costs but fewer days spent homeless compared with standard care and case management only groups. For each additional day housed, clients who received housing subsidies and case management cost Veterans Affairs US$58 (95% CI 4 to 111), cost the US health-care system $50 (–17 to 117), and cost government (ie, health-care services and non-health services) $45 (–19 to 108). Temporary financial assistance was associated with costs of US$10 300 per one new homeless case averted. Furthermore, targeting low-income families would reduce the cost of averting one new case of homelessness to US$6800. Additionally, the benefit gained from temporary financial assistance was found to outweigh the cost, with a net saving of US$20 548. We did not identify any studies reporting on the cost-effectiveness of social assistance programmes and employment support.

Section: Discussion

We found that permanent supportive housing significantly improved housing stability, with little to no negative effects on other social and health outcomes. Permanent supportive housing stability outcomes remained statistically significant at 6 years of follow-up. Similarly, income assistance interventions, particularly housing subsidies, improved housing stability and food security. Effects on other income and employment related outcomes were inconsistent.
Most studies on permanent supportive housing included individuals with severe mental illness who had previous experience of homelessness. Several studies showed that permanent supportive housing can end homelessness and assist this population to achieve housing stability, compared with usual services. The effects of permanent supportive housing on housing stability are similar for individuals with high or moderate levels of need. A small amount of evidence suggests that recipients of permanent supportive housing report greater improvements in their subjective quality of life than those receiving standard care. Additionally, to date, studies have shown no evidence that recipients of permanent supportive housing have improvements in other health and social outcomes (eg, mental health, substance use) compared with controls. Despite wide variation in the methodological quality of the included studies, economic evidence is consistent with findings from a previous review of cost and cost-effectiveness studies done between 2007 and 2015. We found that permanent supportive housing results in cost offsets, but requires additional resources for implementation. The extent to which permanent supportive housing can be regarded as providing value for money is dependent on the willingness of governments to pay for the achieved housing outcomes.
Our systematic review provides the most up-to-date evidence on permanent supportive housing and income assistance as of February, 2020, and is the only existing review, to our knowledge, that includes a study of long-term housing stability outcomes over a 6-year period. The addition of this recent publication serves to address a limitation of the research to date—ie, the relatively short-term follow-up of previous studies. Previous reviews included temporary or abstinence-contingent housing interventions, depended on a high percentage of observational studies, or restricted the inclusion of studies on the basis of date or language. For example, a 2018 review included only randomised controlled trials with a follow-up of at least 1 year and focused exclusively on housing stability outcomes. The authors concluded that a range of housing programmes and case management interventions appear to reduce homelessness and improve housing stability compared with usual services. Similar findings were reported by Baxter and colleagues, who assessed the outcomes of four randomised control trials published up to 2017, and considered housing stability as a secondary outcome. The authors found that permanent supportive housing resulted in large improvements in housing stability, however, short-term effects on health and wellbeing outcomes were unclear. We completed an independent replication of housing outcomes, and confirmed the findings of previous reviews, while concurrently providing additional evidence on a variety of psychosocial and cost-effectiveness outcomes from a broader set of study designs. Replication of the findings of systematic reviews is crucial to ensure robustness or generalisability of systematic review results. Without replication of results, policies, guidelines, or practices could be implemented on the basis of tenuous evidence. Furthermore, our review enabled people with lived experience of homelessness to engage with topic prioritisation and review processes, which represents a valuable and unique approach to community engagement, health equity, and development of trust in review findings. Homelessness is an international public health priority and, thus replication of systematic review findings has implications for public policy and programme implementation.
Furthermore, our review is the first to synthesise evidence on the effect of income assistance interventions on the social and health outcomes of homeless individuals. Income assistance interventions have not been as widely studied as housing interventions, in part due to the complexity of isolating the intervention in populations with complex social and economic needs. Furthermore, the effect of such interventions on subjective outcomes including quality of life might require longer follow-up and more intensive interventions to identify any differences, which pose challenges for study design. Furthermore, investigation of the effect of income assistance interventions on individual outcomes in the context of a challenging political–economic climate and ongoing systemic barriers remains difficult. However, research on other populations, such as low-income families and pregnant women accessing income supplements, has demonstrated positive outcomes, thus highlighting the importance of comprehensive services, longitudinal support, and patient advocacy as part of the intervention. Existing economic evidence shows that the additional cost of providing income assistance is found to be minimal and outweighed by its economic benefit to society.
We used high-quality methods to synthesise our evidence, did meta-analyses on housing stability, and used GRADE methods to assess the certainty of the effects. Although our review offers a unique summary of evidence that is specific to individuals with lived experience of homelessness, it has some limitations. All included studies were done in the USA or Canada. Thus, we hypothesise that the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of these interventions could differ globally. Caution should be taken in generalising these findings to other high-income countries with substantially different health or social systems. The GRADE certainty of evidence ranged from low to moderate, indicating that future research will probably affect our confidence in the effect estimates, and also likely change the estimates themselves. Another significant limitation is the heterogeneity between studies with regard to interventions and standard care models, which might vary markedly both within and between countries, and continues to restrict comparisons and interpretations of outcomes. Such heterogeneity precluded meta-analysis for most outcomes and we therefore relied on narrative synthesis for the majority of this review. To reduce reporting bias, we used the SWiM reporting guidelines. Future research on the development of fidelity standards for single-site programmes would be valuable to generate implementation data.
The review uncovered health equity findings: women were housed 6 months earlier than men and permanent supportive housing housed even the most vulnerable and people with severe mental illness, thus promoting health equity. Although research on social outcomes of housing and income interventions has been done, further work is needed to assess health outcomes. Additionally, patient-important outcomes (ie, outcomes that patients consider most important) require longer follow-up period and realist evaluation to better understand what works, for whom, and under what conditions.
The potentially devastating consequences of homelessness demand effective interventions and policy action to end homelessness. This systematic review studied interventions that were selected with the input of people with lived experience of homelessness, successfully replicated housing effects reported in other reviews, included new studies with outcomes up to 6 years of follow-up, and considers an expanded list of social and health outcomes and economic findings. As a result of research findings on the effectiveness of permanent supportive housing, countries in Europe, Canada, and the USA have prioritised the development of non-abstinence-contingent permanent supportive housing programmes to help people with serious mental illness who have extensive histories of chronic homelessness. However, a need persists to educate policy makers and the public about the effectiveness of these interventions to enable further refinement, scale-up, and integration of these interventions within health and social care systems.

Section: Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Inner City Health Associates (Toronto, ON, Canada). We thank Doug Salzwedel for the systematic search, Glenna Jenkins for her editorial work on this paper, and Akalewold Gebremeskel, Annie Huiru Sun, Asia Rehman, Dorian Deshauer, Ellen Snyder, German Chique-Alfonzo, Jean Wang, Kathy Hardill, Mackenzie Wilson, Nicole Pinto, Oreen Mendonca, Vanessa Ymele Leki, and Victoire Kpade for their technical support in screening, data extraction, and critical appraisal.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (895.60 KB) Supplementary appendix
