Title: Economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking in the USA: an economic modelling study


Abstract: Summary


Abstract_Section: Background

Despite large geographical disparities in the prevalence of cigarette smoking across the USA, there is a paucity of state-level estimates of economic loss attributable to smoking to inform tobacco control policies at the national and state levels. We aimed to estimate the state-level economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking in the USA.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this economic modelling study, we used a dynamic macroeconomic model of personal income per capita at the state level. Based on publicly available data on state-level income, its determinants, and smoking status for 2011–20, we first estimated the elasticity of personal income per capita with respect to the prevalence of non-smoking adults (aged ≥18 years) in the USA using a mixed-effects, generalised linear, dynamic panel data model. We used the estimated elasticity to measure the state-specific, annual, avoidable economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking in 2020 under the counterfactual 5% prevalence of cigarette smoking. We then estimated the state-specific cumulative economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking in 2020 using the coefficient of lagged income in the dynamic model. National estimates on economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking were obtained by summing state-specific estimates.

Abstract_Section: Findings

In the mixed-effects model, the elasticity of personal income per capita with respect to the prevalence of non-smoking adults was 0·143 (p=0·063). The estimated annual income loss per capita in 2020 ranged from US$331 in Utah to $1674 in Kentucky. The state mean population-weighted loss per capita was $1100. The annual combined loss of income and unpaid household production at the national level was $436·7 billion (equivalent to 2·1% of US gross domestic product [GDP] in 2020). The cumulative loss of income and unpaid household production was $864·5 billion (equivalent to 4·3% of US GDP in 2020).

Abstract_Section: Interpretation

Smoking causes substantial economic loss in the USA. Tobacco control efforts that lower the prevalence of smoking equitably can contribute considerably to improved macroeconomic performance in the short and long term by reducing health expenditures and avoiding productivity losses.

Abstract_Section: Funding

American Cancer Society.

Section: Introduction

In the USA, tobacco smoking causes illnesses among more than 16 million adults and 527 736 premature deaths each year, accounting for 17·9% of all deaths annually. Most of the tangible costs attributable to tobacco smoking are evident in two areas: health expenditures to treat illnesses and productivity loss due to morbidity and premature mortality. Health-care expenses or funding for tobacco control activities divert resources away from physical and human capital accumulation, as well as the research and development needed for technological progress and productivity growth. Furthermore, illnesses and deaths attributable to tobacco smoking reduce the participation and employability of the labour force.
Previous studies in the USA based on the cost-of-illness approach showed that use of tobacco products and exposure to second-hand smoke were associated with excess health-care use and expenditure (including out-of-pocket catastrophic health-care expenses, medical expenses covered by private and public health insurance, and government spending on health-care infrastructure), and loss of market and household productivity. Only one study has included both health-care costs and productivity loss attributable to tobacco smoking to measure total economic cost. However, these studies estimated health-care expenses and productivity losses attributable to tobacco smoking as independent components without consideration of the fact that resources used for the treatment of tobacco-attributable diseases and tobacco control can otherwise be used for investments in physical and human capital, as well as research and development, which can in turn reinforce productivity and economic growth. Furthermore, estimates on the economic burden of tobacco smoking in the USA at the state level are scarce ( appendix pp 2–11 ). State-level data are necessary to inform tobacco control policies, given that most efforts are implemented at the state and local levels across the USA. We aimed to fill this data gap by providing a combined estimate of economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking in the USA, covering health-care spending, productivity loss, and the costs emerging from their interdependencies at the state level and national level, based on a dynamic macroeconomic model of state-level personal income per capita.


Section: Methods

In this economic modelling study, we estimated the economic loss attributable to cigarette smoking in the USA using an aggregate production function, relating aggregate output to the factors of production (eg, labour, human capital, and physical capital). This approach builds on a previously used structural model that measures the economic costs of non-communicable diseases at the national level. This model first identifies disease burden, in terms of how mortality and morbidity reduce effective labour supply. The mortality effect is reflected in the reduction in population size, and the morbidity effect is reflected in reduced labour force participation in terms of reduced work hours or leaving jobs. The model then formulates the process through which the treatment costs of non-communicable diseases decrease private and public savings, and hamper accumulation of physical capital. The model postulates that, even when treatment is covered by health insurance, medical expenditures are borne by society in the form of increased health insurance premiums and taxes related to health care (eg, for Medicare or Medicaid programmes). However, this model does not account for the reduction in investment for human capital accumulation and expenditures on research and development due to health-care costs related to non-communicable diseases.
Structural models become intractable if the aim is to capture the spectrum of interactions that transmit through individual choices of labour supply, consumption, and savings, as well as employers’ choices of factors of production. This current study relied on a reduced form version of the structural model ( appendix pp 12–15 ). The model captures all of the underlying processes affecting income growth, from changes in the factors of production in the past driven by changes in smoking status. Details on the derivation of the reduced form income growth model from the structural form aggregate production function are available elsewhere.
The primary outcome was personal income per capita at the state level. Based on the reduced form income growth model, we estimated the elasticity of state-level personal income per capita with respect to the prevalence of non-smokers among the adult population, after controlling for state-specific determinants of income that potentially confound the relationship between income and smoking status. The elasticity measured the marginal effect of a given percentage change in the prevalence of non-smokers on income. Increasing the prevalence of non-smokers implied the following two pathways: increasing smoking cessation (ie, more former smokers) and decreasing smoking initiation (ie, more never smokers). By incorporating the measure of prevalence of non-smokers, this study identified the economic gain from both increased rates of smoking cessation and decreased rates of smoking initiation, which reduce morbidity and mortality attributable to cigarette smoking.
The determinants of state income included the proportion of the population at working age (18–64 years), representing the size of the labour force; two measures of educational attainment (ie, the proportion of high-school graduates aged ≥25 years in the state's population and the proportion of college graduates aged ≥25 years with at least a bachelor's degree in the state's population), representing the state of human capital stock; the number of patents and trademarks issued to the residents of each state, representing the state of technology and innovation that influence productivity; the state's tax revenue and capital expenditures, representing public capital stock; and bank deposit, as a proxy of private capital stock. In addition, we included state-level prevalence of obesity in the adult population to proxy for the general health-associated status of the population and health-care setting. Data sources and details of the measures are provided in the appendix (pp 16–17) .
The elasticity parameter was used to estimate the smoking-attributable fraction, defined as foregone income, interpreted as avoidable income loss attributable to cigarette smoking as the proportion of observed income. The derivation of the smoking-attributable fraction is provided in the appendix (pp 13–15 ). To measure avoidable income loss, we used the counterfactual of how much higher the state income per capita would have been if the prevalence of cigarette smoking had been 5%. Although reaching a smoking prevalence of 0% would be ideal from a public health perspective, we used the 5% target in line with the Healthy People 2030 goal. This target implied increasing the prevalence of non-smokers from the current level (in 2020) to 95% in each state. We ran a sensitivity analysis to measure avoidable economic loss using more ambitious targets, such that smoking prevalence approached 0% in all states.
Given that some of the effects in the current period were propagated into future periods through the productivity and income in previous periods, the cumulative effect of cigarette smoking in 2020 carried over since 2010 was estimated on the basis of the coefficient of lagged income in the reduced form income growth model. The technical details of this formulation are provided in the appendix (p 15) . Furthermore, the effect of cigarette smoking on personal income per capita was multiplied by the total population in the corresponding state and year to obtain the estimate of the total income loss at the population level.
We followed the same steps for measuring the avoidable loss of unpaid household productivity attributable to cigarette smoking, which captured the time costs of both individuals, who were not employed in the market, and of informal caregivers, who were caring for family members and other individuals with short-term, medium-term, and long-term illnesses, chronic conditions, or disabilities attributable to first-hand or second-hand exposure to tobacco smoke. In the absence of state-level valuation of household production, the estimated elasticity of personal income per capita with respect to the prevalence of non-smokers among the adult population was used to estimate the value of household production loss per capita at the national level.
The reduced form income growth model was estimated with dynamic panel data regression using fixed-effects, random-effects, and mixed-effects generalised linear models. These models were estimated using the regression equation: l n ⁡ 𝛾 𝑝 𝑠 ⁢ 𝑡 = 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1 ⁢ l n ⁡ 𝛾 𝑝 𝑠 , 𝑡 − 𝜏 + ∑ 𝑖 𝛽 2 ⁢ 𝑖 ⁢ l n ⁡ 𝑋 𝑖 𝑠 , 𝑡 − 𝜏 + 𝛽 3 ⁢ 𝐷 𝑡 + 𝜇 𝑠 + 𝑣 𝑠 ⁢ 𝑡 where y p st is income per capita of state ( s ) in year ( t ), X i st represents state-specific i-th characteristic (including smoking status of the adult population) in state ( s ) in year ( t ), ln stands for natural logarithm, D t is the year variable capturing all of the national trends (eg, inflation, technological progress, and the average effect of the X i variables), μ s is the state-specific effects, v st is the random disturbance term that varies across states and years and has a mean of 0, and τ is the lag length. In the fixed-effects regression model, μ s represents the state-specific, time-invariant effect. In the random-effects and mixed-effects models, μ s is a random variable.
In the dynamic models, the causal effect of a given change in any regressor was expected to reflect income change with a lag. Epidemiological evidence linking lifetime smoking history to incidence of diseases indicated that the risks of lung cancer and cardiovascular diseases decreased significantly in individuals within 5 years of quitting smoking, relative to the risks in those who continued to smoke. In view of this latency from smoking reduction to potential income gain, we considered a 5-year lag in the regressors. The appropriateness of this lag length was also tested with the Hausman test on two-stage least-squares instrumental variable estimation, which uses lagged smoking status as an instrument for contemporaneous smoking status. The details of this test are provided in the appendix (p 18) .
It should be noted that there was potential simultaneity of income level and smoking status. On one hand, smokers tend to have lower productivity and income than do non-smokers. On the other hand, individuals with lower income and socioeconomic status are more likely to smoke than are individuals with higher income and socioeconomic status. However, use of lag in the smoking status variable was expected to remove the simultaneity of income and smoking status. Lagged smoking status can be treated as predetermined or exogenous, such that the estimated elasticity of income per capita with respect to smoking status would be unbiased.
The dependent variable and all regressors of the model were transformed as the natural log of the level for each state divided by the population-weighted mean for all states for every year. Although the mean effects of the regressors were reflected in the year dummies, the transformed regressors reflected the effects relative to the national mean. The standard errors of the estimated coefficients were adjusted for clustering of observations at the state level. The stationarity of the dependent variable was tested using the Levin-Lin-Chu unit root test, which assumes that all panels (ie, US states) had the same autoregressive parameter. This test is recommended for balanced panels of moderate size, as is the case with the ten observations per panel unit of 50 US states and the District of Columbia. The dependent variable is non-stationary under the null hypothesis. Two tests were conducted under two different alternative hypotheses. The first alternative hypothesis stated that all series in the panel were stationary around a deterministic level, specific to the unit (ie, a fixed effect). The second alternative hypothesis stated that each time series was stationary around a unit-specific deterministic time trend. The unit root test was done in Stata (version 17.0), using the command xtunitroot llc .
The estimations were carried out using the regression commands xtreg for the fixed-effects and random-effects models (with options fe and re) , meglm for the mixed-effects model, and ivregress 2sls (followed by hausman, sigmamore ) for the Hausman test in Stata (version 17·0). The measurement of economic loss was done in an Excel spreadsheet based on the equation and subsequent steps detailed in the appendix (p 15) .
The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Section: Results

There were considerable variations in income and smoking status across US states and over time, showing increases in income and decreases in smoking prevalence ( table 1 ). The disparity across states remained steady with respect to the human capital variables, tax burden, and business and technological innovation, but widened with respect to government investment in physical and social infrastructure, business environment, and prevalence of obesity among adults. State-level personal income per capita and prevalence of non-smokers among the adult population showed a strong positive correlation over 2011–20 ( figure ).
The elasticity of personal income per capita with respect to prevalence of non-smokers was estimated to be 0·158 (p=0·041) in the random-effects model and 0·143 (p=0·063) in the mixed-effects model, indicating that a 1% increase in the prevalence of non-smokers in the adult population was expected to increase personal income per capita by 0·14% to 0·16% ( table 2 ). Although positive, the fixed-effects estimate was far lower at 0·031 (p=0·57) ( table 2 ). The persistence of smoking disparity across US states throughout the sample period caused low variation within states in the prevalence of non-smokers relative to the national mean. The low variation rendered the fixed-effects estimate of the effect of smoking status inseparable from the time-invariant state fixed-effects, and inapplicable to identify the contribution of smoking status to income determination. The Levin-Lin-Chu unit root tests strongly rejected the null hypothesis of non-stationarity (p<0·0001), indicating that the models used in the analysis was appropriate for the panel regression. Among control variables, the proportion of individuals at working age (18–64 years) in the total population, proportion of college graduates with a bachelor's degree (aged ≥25 years) in the total population, the number of patents and trademarks per capita, and tax burden were positively associated with state-level income ( table 1 ).
Given the wide and persistent variability in smoking status between states ( table 1 ), we used the mixed-effects estimate of the elasticity of personal income per capita with respect to the prevalence of non-smokers among the adult population ( table 2 ) to estimate avoidable income loss ( table 3 ). The estimated state annual income loss per capita in 2020 ranged from US$331 in Utah to $1674 in Kentucky, with a population-weighted state mean loss of $1100 ( table 3 ). The total annual income loss in 2020 ranged from $0·6 billion in Vermont to $29·6 billion in California. The total annual income loss for the USA given by the sum of total income losses for all states and the District of Columbia amounted to $362·6 billion, equivalent to 1·7% of US gross domestic product (GDP) of $20·9 trillion in 2020.
The estimated coefficient of lagged personal income per capita was 0·531 (p=0·018) in the mixed-effects model ( table 2 ). Any coefficient value less than 1·00 indicated that a given smoking status in the past year would have diminishing effect on current income, the further into the past that is explored. Based on this coefficient of lagged income, the cumulative income loss per capita ranged from $744 in Utah to $3661 in the District of Columbia. The cumulative total income loss ranged from $1·3 billion in Vermont to $60·5 billion in California, with total cumulative loss in the USA amounting to $735·1 billion, equivalent to 3·5% of US GDP ( tables 3, 4 ). State cigarette tax revenue recovered only a small proportion of this loss: 0·4% in Missouri to 7·1% in New Hampshire ( tables 3, 4 ).
The value of unpaid household production loss per capita was estimated to be $225 in 2020, which translates into $74·1 billion total annual loss in 2020 or 0·4% of US GDP ( table 4 ). The cumulative household production was estimated to be $156·7 billion, equivalent to 0·7% of US GDP. The avoidable annual income and unpaid household production loss combined in 2020 was estimated to be $436·7 billion, equivalent to 2·1% of US GDP in 2020. The avoidable cumulative income and unpaid household production loss combined was estimated to be $891·8 billion, equivalent to 4·3% of US GDP in 2020.
Under the most ambitious scenario of smoking prevalence approaching 0% in all states and the District of Columbia, the avoidable annual income and unpaid household production loss combined was $620·7 billion, and the avoidable cumulative loss was $1207·6 billion ( appendix p 19 ). A different set of estimates was obtained with the random-effects estimation of the elasticity of income, which generated higher estimates of economic loss than those based on the mixed-effects estimation. The results of the sensitivity analysis are provided in the appendix (p 19) .

Section: Discussion

Using a mixed-effects generalised linear model at the state level, this economic modelling study estimated that the elasticity of personal income per capita, with respect to prevalence of non-smokers, was 0·143, indicating that a reduction in smoking has the potential to generate considerable growth in income. At the macroeconomic level, total annual economic loss attributable to smoking in 2020 was US$436·7 billion, equivalent to 2·1% of US GDP that year. We estimated that the cumulative economic loss in 2020 was $891·8 billion, equivalent to 4·3% of US GDP, which is greater than the previous estimate for the USA (3·2%). The mixed-effects estimate of the elasticity of personal income per capita with respect to smoking status was somewhat lower than the random-effects estimate. This difference is most plausibly due to the ability of the mixed-effects model to nest variability both within and between states in regressors.
Additionally, the estimate from this current study contrasts sharply with the $94·2 billion annual market value of cigarette sales in the USA, which is accrued to the tobacco industry as profits, to employees of the tobacco industry as wages and salaries, and to the governments as tax revenue and user fees that might become available for the health budget (including for tobacco control funding). These findings indicate that the economic loss from cigarette smoking far outweighs the value generated by the cigarette market for the US economy. This substantial net loss to the economy can be mitigated with coordinated and comprehensive evidence-based tobacco control measures, which promote cessation and prevent initiation of tobacco use.
By taking into account the full value of lost productivity, these results suggest that the economic loss at the national level far exceeds previous estimates. For instance, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Smoking-Attributable Mortality, Morbidity, and Economic Costs system, cigarette smoking and exposure to second-hand smoke caused a total of $96·8 billion in annual productivity loss in the USA between 2000 and 2004 (equivalent to 0·8% of US GDP in 2004). The US Surgeon General's report in 2014 estimated that, from 2005 to 2009, average annual productivity loss at the national level was $150·7 billion due to smoking and $5·7 billion due to exposure to second-hand smoke. However, these estimates do not reflect the full value of lost productivity because they did not account for lost productivity due to morbidity, which has been estimated to be $184·9 billion for the year 2018. Additionally, health expenditures related to cigarette smoking accounted for 11·7% (>$225 billion) of total annual health-care spending in the USA in 2014, compared with previous estimates of 7–9% (ie, $132·5 billion in 2009, $170·6 billion in 2010, and $175·9 in 2012). In 2014, there were an estimated 461 295 annual hospitalisations for cancer cases attributable to tobacco use at the cost of $8·2 billion, accounting for 45% of hospitalisation costs across the USA. Tobacco control efforts should take into account the higher estimates of this study when planning and allocating resources.
The estimates of economic loss attributable to smoking in this study improve on existing estimates in several ways. First, the human capital approach used in previous studies focuses on worker productivity and does not consider the reduction in employment probability or in the number of adults at working age, which is driven by morbidity and mortality related to tobacco. In turn, these effects on the labour market transmit into the substitution of labour and capital, and the accumulation of physical and human capital over time, affecting the aggregate-level output and income. Measuring personal income per capita instead incorporates all of these outcomes ( appendix pp 13–14 ).
Second, the human capital approach tends to overestimate the economic burden of premature death by focusing on the earning loss of the deceased worker, despite how the individual can be replaced with excess supply of equally productive workers in the economy. The aggregate output is not affected under this circumstance, except for the frictional cost to search for and hire a replacement worker by the employer. By contrast, a loss of output is observed in the economy when the deceased worker is irreplaceable with a living person. The reduced form estimate of the elasticity of income per capita with respect to smoking status used in this study reflects the net effect of these opposite changes at the aggregate level, with other factors remaining the same.
Third, the measurement of excess health expenditure or productivity loss in previous studies focused on annual loss. However, deaths and diseases related to smoking in one period not only affect income in that period, but some of that effect is also propagated into future periods through income in previous periods. Therefore, the full impact of smoking should capture the cumulative effects over time. By applying a dynamic macroeconomic framework in capturing the future effects of smoking on income loss, this study provides a measure of the long-term economic burden of smoking.
Fourth, the elasticity of personal income per capita estimated in this study parameterises the relationship between an economy's income and smoking status at the population level on the basis of relative changes (in terms of percentages). This measure has a distinct advantage over measures based on absolute changes (in terms of percentage points) because it is a pure number and is independent of the units of measurement. The measure is generalisable to the assessment of economic loss attributable to smoking at the national and subnational levels in different settings or countries. Additionally, the measure can be extended to the assessment of economic loss attributable to the use of all tobacco products, including electronic nicotine delivery systems.
Finally, this study is the first to derive state-level estimates of the economic costs of morbidity and mortality attributable to smoking in the USA, which highlights the spatial disparity in smoking and could inform policy interventions for tobacco control at the state level, particularly in US states with a disproportionately high burden of tobacco consumption and in those that grow tobacco. The large economic losses attributable to smoking, estimated at both state and national levels in this study, provide further impetus for the ratification of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control by the USA.
Nevertheless, the utility of this approach goes far beyond invoking policy implications for tobacco control. The measures of personal income per capita and smoking status relative to average state levels used in this study identify the role that spatial disparity in smoking behaviour plays in the persistence of disparities in state income per capita. US states that have fallen behind the rest of the nation in economic growth and welfare can act on factors, such as tobacco control, that have the potential to accelerate growth and income convergence. The state-level estimates of economic loss attributable to smoking in this study provide a crucial evidence base in support of the solutions to address spatial disparities in tobacco use and disparate health and economic outcomes.
This study has several limitations. First, although we incorporated the prevalence of obesity as a proxy for the health behaviour at population level, the smoking status variable might have accounted for any spillover effects of reduced smoking on mortality or morbidity from other risk behaviours associated with smoking (eg, alcohol consumption), or related diseases (eg, diabetes), road traffic accidents, and mental health and substance misuse. Consequently, this study might have overestimated the economic loss attributable to smoking exclusively. Future research should address this bias.
Second, this study estimated the economic burden of cigarette smoking for 2020, which was an atypical year due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Evidence suggests that smoking might increase the risk of severe COVID-19. This increased risk could mediate the relationship between smoking and income. However, the year dummies included in the regression model were expected to address this concern by accounting for unusual fluctuations in income seen in 2020. The estimates of annual economic loss for individual years from 2011 to 2019, obtained by the same approach as followed for calculating 2020 estimates, showed no discernible fluctuation in 2020 ( appendix pp 20–21 ).
Third, smoking imposes some intangible costs on society, including the psychological pain and suffering of individuals and their families caused by smoking-induced diseases, and the anxiety and grief associated with premature deaths from these illnesses. These costs interfere with quality of life and productivity; however, they are not easily quantifiable and might not be fully reflected in the measure of personal income per capita used in this current analysis.
Finally, the smoking status variable might have been subject to measurement error driven by reporting bias under different survey measures, sampling design, and low response rate in the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, introducing uncertainties around the estimates of smoking prevalence. Comparison of national-level estimates of smoking prevalence across nationally representative surveys in the USA showed that estimates from this system and from the National Health Interview Survey estimates were similar statistically, but slightly lower than the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey estimates. If the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey is assumed to be the gold standard, the measurement error in the smoking status variable of the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System could have biased the estimated coefficient of the smoking variable downward, leading to underestimation of the true effect of smoking on income.
Although stronger evidence-based tobacco control measures are necessary to avoid the substantial economic loss that smoking imposes on society, the increasing prevalence of tobacco smoking among people with low income and resources points to the urgency of employing equitable tobacco control measures, which include increases in state cigarette excise tax alongside targeted smoking cessation efforts. Currently, only three states (California, Oregon, and Utah) fund state tobacco prevention and cessation programmes close to the levels recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Scaling up these efforts with increased funding in state tobacco control could substantially improve overall macroeconomic performance and household productivity and income, and, most importantly, could reduce economic and health disparities, given that the prevalence of cigarette smoking is highest among individuals with lower socioeconomic status and in a disadvantaged position. The USA is poised to benefit most from tobacco control by reducing the burden of health-care expenses related to smoking and by avoiding smoking-induced economic loss.

Section: Data sharing

All data were collected from publicly available secondary sources and include identifiers of 50 individual US states and the District of Columbia, year of annual observation, and the dependent and explanatory variables used for the analysis. Data will be made available to others in an Excel file upon request to the corresponding author.

Section: Declaration of interests

NN and AKMGH have received subawards from the University of Illinois Chicago (Chicago, IL, USA) through a grant from the Bloomberg Philanthropies, outside of the submitted work. AM has received a University of Southern California Tobacco Center of Regulatory Science Award funded by the National Cancer Institute and US Food and Drug Administration, outside of the submitted work. The remaining salaries of NN and AM and the salaries of SA, ZX, PB, FI, KRY, and AJ were funded solely through American Cancer Society funds. KRY serves on the Flatiron Health Equity Advisory Board, outside of the submitted work.

Section: Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge the data analytical support for the revision of the manuscript from Huicong Zhang, funded by the American Cancer Society for her internship within the Tobacco Control Research team. NN, SA, ZX, AM, PB, FI, KRY, and AJ were employed by the American Cancer Society at the time of study, which receives grants from private and corporate foundations, including foundations associated with companies in the health-care sector for research outside of the submitted work.

Section: Supplementary Material (1)

PDF (494.43 KB) Supplementary appendix
